A holistic
perspective of
scientific
agriculture

A joint initiative to
impart farmers with
technical knowledge on
basic agriculture.

% develoPPP.de
MGs eee

a


Disclaimer:

The opinions expressed provided in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of GIZ . The
designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion what-
soever on the part of GIZ concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area, or concerning the delimitation of
its frontiers or boundaries.

FARMER’S HANDBOOK ON BASIC AGRICULTURE

Prepared & compiled by

Dr. P. Chandra Shekara

National Institute of Agricultural Extension
Management (MANAGE)

Ministry of Agriculture, Gol

Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh

India

Dr. N. Balasubramani

National Institute of Agricultural Extension
Management (MANAGE)

Ministry of Agriculture, Gol

Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh

India

Dr. Rajeev Sharma

Dr. Chitra Shukla

Desai Fruits & Vegetables Pvt. Ltd.
Navsari, Gujarat

India

Desai Fruits & Vegetables Pvt. Ltd.
Navsari, Gujarat, India

Desai Fruits & Vegetables Pvt. Ltd.
Navsari, Gujarat
India

Second Edition: August 2016

Dr. Ajit Kumar

Desai Fruits & Vegetables Pvt. Ltd.
Navsari, Gujarat

India

Bakul C. Chaudhary

Desai Fruits & Vegetables Pvt. Ltd.
Navsari, Gujarat

India

Mr. Max Baumann

Planning Officer

Section “Agricultural Production & Resource Use”
Division 45 - Rural Development and Agriculture
Deutsche Gesellschaft fiir Internationale Zusam-
menarbeit (GIZ) GmbH

Germany

Max.Baumann@giz.de

Financed by

German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation
and Development (BMZ)

Published by

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


The Authors acknowledge the contribution of following experts/professionals in developing the
Handbook.

Mr. Max Baumann, Planning Officer, GIZ, Germany

Mr. Fredrick Oberthur, Planning Officer, GIZ, Germany

Mr. Ajit Kumar Desai, Chairman, DFV, Navsari, Gujarat

Dr. Sashidhar, Professor, University of Agriculture and Horticultural Sciences, Shimoga, Karnataka
Dr. Syed Ahmed Hussain, Professor, ANGRAU, Hyderabad, Telangana

Mr. V.Gunasekaran, Agricultural Officer, Pesticide Testing Laboratory, Dharmapuri, Tamilnadu
Dr. M.V.Shantharam, Former Dean, ANGRAU, Hyderabad, Telangana

Dr. K. Kareemulla, Principal Scientist, NAARM, Hyderabad, Telangana

Dr. K.V. Jayaraghavendra Rao, Principal Scientist, NAARM, Hyderabad, Telangana

Mr. Thomas A Vivian, Assistant Professor, College of Agriculture, Dhule, Maharastra

Prof. T. M. Bahale, Professor of Agronomy, College of Agriculture, Dhule, Maharastra

Dr. R. K Rahane, Professor of Agricultural Economics, College of Agriculture, Dhule, Maharastra

Dr. G. D. Patil, Professor of Soil Science & Agricultural Chemistry, College of Agriculture, D
hule, Maharastra

Dr. D. N. Padule, Professor of Plant Pathology, College of Agriculture, Dhule, Maharastra

Dr. A. R. Pathak, Vice Chancellor, Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari, Gujarat

Dr. J. B. Patel, Professor, Anand Agricultural University, Anand, Gujarat

Dr. Bhaskar Gaikwad, Programme, Coordinator, KVK, Babhaleshwar, Maharashtra

Mr. Mahendra Dhaibar, CEO, Sustainable Agricultural Development Foundation, Pune, Maharashtra

Dr. R. M. Pankhaniya, Associate Professor, Department of Agronomy, NM College of Agriculture,
Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari, Gujarat

Dr A. M. Bafna, Principal & Dean, Aspee Agri-Business Management Institute, Navsari Agricultural
University, Navsari, Gujarat

Dr G. G. Radadia, Professor & Head, Department of Entomology, NM College of Agriculture, Navsari
Agricultural University, Navsari, Gujarat

Dr B. P. Mehta, Professor, Department of Plant Pathology, Aspee College of Horticulture and Forestry,
Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari, Gujarat

Dr. L. J. Desai, Associate Professor, Department of Agronomy, NM College of Agriculture
Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari, Gujarat

Dr. N. S. Manohar, Associate Professor, Department of Agricultural Economics, Aspee College of
Horticulture and Forestry, Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari, Gujarat

Dr O P Sharma, Associate Professor & Head, Department of Extension Education, College of Veterinary
Science & AH, Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari, Gujarat

Dr. Bruno Schuler, Advisor and Planning Officer, Sustainable Agriculture-Rural Development, GIZ,
Germany

Mr. Rajiv Ahuja, Technical Expert, Natural Resource Management, GIZ, India

Mr. Akhil Dev, Junior Technical Expert, Natural Resource Management, GIZ, India

Acknowledgement

Hs demand for agricultural raw material is now anticipated and agriculture is not any more about
producing farm products and selling them exclusively at the local market. Instead farmers today have
a world market to serve. But the new chances bring new challenges. Farmers and agricultural enterprises,
willing to be part of the new expanding world market, not only have to take into consideration customers’
preferences whom they want to serve, but also adhere to international trade regulations set by WTO and
comply with high production and quality standards required by the importing countries.

Agriculture contributes around 17% to GDP and continues to be among the most important and success-
ful sectors in India. Around 58% of the Indian population depend on agriculture for their livelihood. Apart
from delivering the local industries with top quality raw materials for processing, agriculture provides
almost 10% of total export earnings. However, to support the impressive Indian economic growth in the
coming years, agriculture will have to contribute more towards value addition, productivity enhancement,
high quality products and trained manpower to successfully tackle these challenges.

The states of Gujarat and Maharashtra have competitive advantages for the production of several com-
modities. However, productivity and competitiveness remains low. Rising quality requirements of export
and domestic markets require an up-scaling of the production which is only feasible with educated farmers
and skilled workers.

Desai Fruits and Vegetables (DFV)in cooperation with the Deutsche Gesellschaft fiir Internationale
Zusammenarbeit(GIZ) GmbH on behalf of the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and
Development (BMZ) takes up the existing education gap by implementing a development partnership
called “Partnership Farming India’.

The goal of Partnership Farming India (PFI) is to enable farmers to be self-sufficient decision-makers,
“agripreneurs’, which allows for a more flexible production system and highlights farming as profession by
choice and not by inheritance.

Furthermore, PFI strengthens farmers’ and farm workers’ management skills to adopt modern agricul-
tural practices and concepts and enhance the international competitiveness of smallholders’ agricultural
produce by giving farmers and workers in Gujarat and Maharashtra access to practical agricultural educa-
tion. Therefore, DFV and GIZ in close cooperation with the National Institute of Agricultural Extension
Management (MANAGE, an organization of Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India) developed the
training material on basic agricultural knowledge and skills.

The states of Gujarat and Maharashtra will serve as an example on how to establish long term successful
and trustful business relationships by combining small scale production in the field with large scale pro-
cessing and marketing. I am confident that this effort will serve the Indian agriculture as a replicable model
make lasting contributions towards sustainable agriculture and prosperous farmers.

I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the people and institutions namely MANAGE, DFV and
GIZ,which supported this project and enabled making information available. This is a useful source of in-
formation for farmers, trainers, and other interested persons to improve not only the agriculture but also
the livelihood of the farming community.

Mrs. Sabine Preuss
GIZ-India Programme Director
Natural Resource Management

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Preface

Amature is an important sector of Indian Economy as more than half of its population relies on Ag-
riculture as principle source of income. Research and Extension systems play major role in generation
and dissemination of Agricultural technologies aiming at enhancing the income of farmers. The extension
system adopts series of extension methods such as Training, demonstration, exposure visit to transfer
the technologies from lab to land. Majority of these extension efforts mainly focus on location and crop
specific technologies, and mostly on solution to problem basis. However, there is a need for equipping the
farmers with Basic knowledge of Agriculture in order to create a better knowledge platform at farmer level
for taking appropriate farm management decisions and to absorb modern technologies.

In view of this, Desai Fruits and Vegetables Pvt. Ltd. (DFV), India, in cooperation with the Deutsche
Gesellschaft fiir Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH on behalf of the German Federal Ministry
for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) in close cooperation with National Institute of Ag-
ricultural Extension Management (MANAGE- An Organization of Ministry of Agriculture, Government
of India) brought out Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture to impart technical knowledge on Basic
Agriculture to farmers to provide holistic perspective of scientific Agriculture.

This handbook is a product of series of brainstorming workshops and consultative meetings with various
stakeholders such as Researchers, Academicians, Extension Functionaries, Agripreneurs, Master Trainers
and Farmers. Based on the identified needs, the topics were prioritized and contents were developed with
the help of experts. The farmer-friendly content has been written in simple language, using more pictures
with practical examples for the benefit of farmers.

The book contains six chapters, each focusing on a particular topic. The first chapter, “General conditions
for cultivation of crops’, talks about the basic needs of farmers and farming sector, by providing basic
knowledge on Good Agricultural Practices (GAP), enhancing the awareness of farmers on critical factors
in selection of crops and cropping patterns, judicious use of natural resources such as soil and water, and
emphasizing the importance of mechanization in the field of agriculture.

The second chapter “Soil and Plant Nutrition” is aimed at increasing the awareness and understanding of
farmers about soil, it’s structure, physical, chemical, biological properties, soil fertility and managing the
soil fertility in an economically and environmentally sustainable manner. It also focuses on the need for
soil testing, plant nutrition requirement, organic & inorganic fertilizers, and Integrated Nutrient Manage-
ment (INM) for efficient, economic and sustainable production of crops.

The third chapter of the book is about Pest Management, and focuses on enhancing the awareness of and
understanding among farmers about the crop pests, diseases and weed management through Integrated
Pest Management. It also aims at sensitizing farmers on safe handling of chemicals and plant protection
equipments as also elaborated further in the fifth chapter on “Occupational health and safety of farmers”.
It creates awareness about causes, preventive measures of health hazards, risks & fatalities in agriculture,
and use of first aid in emergencies. It further includes safety tips and care to reduce the risk of injuries and
fatalities while handling machineries and pesticides by farmers.

Time and resources management is an integral part of each and every activity, be it service sector, busi-
ness or day-to-day activities of life. Farming sector too has not remained untouched by it. Therefore, the
fourth chapter of the book is devoted to “Farm Management” It is to educate and equip the farmers to
make proper plans, take appropriate decisions and also to take advantage of the improved technologies
to increase production, assure food security for the family and market opportunities to increase income
considering available resources, anticipated risks, including market fluctuations.

“Farmer's access to services’, the last chapter of the book, aims at enhancing awareness among farmers
about sources of extension, information and services, public and private extension services, agricultural
credit, insurance and legal aspects through Information & Communication Technologies. The content is
useful not only for farmers but also for other stakeholders involved in farm advisory services such as Agri
input dealers, Agripreneurs, Kisan Call Centers and extension functionaries working at grass roots level.

We trust that this Handbook will benefit maximum number of farmers to make farming economically and
environmentally more sustainable.

B. Srinivas, [AS

Director General

MANAGE

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Contents

1. General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops 1-32
2. Soil and Plant Nutrition 33-70
3. Plant Protection 71-96
4. Categories of Pesticides and Precautions 97-98
5. Farm Management 99-120
6. Occupational Health and Safety 121-130
7.  Farmer’s Access to Service 131-136

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture



1. General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops

1.1. Objectives of the session

« To enhance awareness of farmers on critical factors in selection of crops and cropping patterns.
« To create an understanding on judicious use of natural resources such as soil and water.

« To provide basic knowledge on seed and cropping systems.

« To emphasize the importance of mechanization.

« To sensitize the farmers on Good Agricultural Practices (GAP).

1.2. What do we know at the end of the session

« Critical factors in selection of crops and cropping patterns
¢ Judicious use of natural resources such as soil and water

« Basic knowledge on seed

« Cropping systems

« Mechanization

« Good Agricultural Practices (GAP)

Anwet Universities, Research Institutes,
Krishi Vigyan Kendras have been generat-
ing ample technologies to improve the productiv-
ity and profitability of the farmers. How many of
these technologies are reaching the farmers? Base-
line Situation Assessment conducted by Partner-
ship farming in India, in Gujarat and Maharashtra,
clearly indicated that farmers with access to techni-
cal knowledge on agriculture realized better income
compared to others. Fifty one percent of sample
farmers who were part of partnership farming In-
dia had knowledge of soil testing compared to only
28% of control group. Mulching and intercropping
as a practice were not widely adopted by control
group of farmers. They were less aware about other
organic fertilizers. Fertigation as a method of appli-
cation of fertilizers was not widely practiced by con-
trol group. Farmers who accessed information from
agricultural universities and magazines were less in
number in the control group. The treatment farmers
had an average yield of 35.65 tons and control farm-
ers had yield of 22.36 tons of banana per acre. The
average net income of the treatment farmers was Rs
93,822 and for the control farmers Rs.81,659. More
than 85% of the farmers wanted basic education on
agriculture and crop production and ready to pay
for undergoing such basic education and training.
There was a clear interest in the farmers to improve
their skill and knowledge and they were ready to
pay for the service.

The above study clearly indicates that the knowl-
edge gap is prevailing among farmers and those who
have access to knowledge harvested better profits.

Increase in productivity and profitability can be
achieved through:

¢ Blending practical knowledge with scientific
technologies

« Efficient use of natural resources

« Adopting time specific management prac-
tices

« Giving priority for quality driven produc-
tion

« Adopting suitable farming systems

« Adoption of location specific technology

« Market demand driven production

« Adopting low cost and no cost technologies


waj}sAs Builddoid pue sdoid jo UoNnDajas ay} UO SUOISIDap HuloUaNyu! si0}De4

General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops
Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops

1.3. Factors influencing decisions on
the selection of crops and cropping
system

Climatic factors

Is the crop/cropping system suitable for local weath-
er parameters such as temperature, rainfall, sun
shine hours, relative humidity, wind velocity, wind
direction, seasons and agro-ecological situations?

Soil conditions

Is the crop/cropping system suitable for local soil
type, pH and soil fertility?

Water

« Do you have adequate water source like a tanks,
wells, dams, etc.?

« Do you receive adequate rainfall?

« Is the distribution of rainfall suitable to grow
identified crops?

« Is the water quality suitable?

¢ Is electricity available for lifting the water?

« Do you have pump sets, micro irrigation sys-
tems?

Cropping system options

« Do you have the opportunity to go for inter-
cropping, mixed cropping, multi-storeyed
cropping, relay cropping, crop rotation, etc.?

« Do you have the knowledge on cropping sys-
tems management?

Past and present experiences of
farmers

« What were your previous experiences with re-
gard to the crop/cropping systems that you are
planning to choose?

« What is the opinion of your friends, relatives
and neighbours on proposed crop/cropping
systems?

Expected profit and risk

« How much profit are you expecting from the
proposed crop/cropping system?

« Whether this profit is better than the existing
crop/cropping system?

« What are the risks you are anticipating in the
proposed crop/cropping system?
Do you have the solution? Can you manage the
risks?

¢ Is it worth to take the risks for anticipated prof-
its?

Economic conditions of farmers
including land holding

« Are the proposed crop/cropping systems suit-
able for your size of land holding?

« Are your financial resources adequate to man-
age the proposed crop/cropping system?

¢ If not, can you mobilize financial resources
through alternative routes?

Labour availability and mechanization
potential

« Can you manage the proposed crop/cropping
system through your family labour?

¢ Ifnot, do you have adequate labours to manage
the same?

¢ Is family/hired labour equipped to handle the
proposed crop/cropping system?

« Are there any mechanization options to substi-
tute the labour?

¢ Is machinery available? Affordable? Cost effec-
tive?

¢ Is family/hired labour equipped to handle the
machinery?

Technology availability and suitability

« Is the proposed crop/cropping system suitable?

« Do you have technologies for the proposed
crop/cropping system?

« Do you have extension access to get the tech-
nologies?

« Are technologies economically feasible and
technically viable?

« Are technologies complex or user-friendly?

Market demand and availability of
market infrastructure

« Are the crops proposed in market demand?

¢ Do you have market infrastructure to sell your
produce?

¢ Do you have organized marketing system to re-
duce the intermediaries?

« Do you have answers for questions such as

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops

where to sell? When to sell? Whom to sell to?
What form to sell in? What price to sell for?

¢ Do you get real time market information and
market intelligence on proposed crops?

Policies and schemes

« Do Government policies favour your crops?

¢ Is there any existing scheme which incentivises
your crop?

« Are you eligible to avail those benefits?

Public and private extension influence

Do you have access to Agricultural Technology
Management Agency (ATMA)/ Departmental
extension functionaries to get advisory?

¢ Do you know Kissan Call Center?

¢ Do you have access to KVKs, Agricultural Uni-
versities and ICAR organizations?

¢ Do you subscribe agricultural magazines?

¢ Do you read agricultural articles in newspa-
pers?

¢ Do you get any support from input dealers, Ag-
ribusiness Companies, NGOs, Agriclinics and
Agribusiness Centers?

Availability of required agricultural
inputs including agricultural credit

¢ Do you get adequate agricultural inputs such as
seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, and implements in
time?

¢ Do you have access to institutional credit?

Post harvest storage and processing
technologies

¢ Do you have your own storage facility?

¢ Ifnot, do you have access to such facility?

¢ Do you have access to primary processing facil-
ity?

« Do you know technologies for value addition of
your crop?

¢ Do you have market linkage for value added
products?

« Are you aware about required quality standards
of value added products of proposed crops?

armers need to answer all the above questions
while making decisions for choosing a crop/
cropping pattern. During this decision making pro-
cess, farmer cross check the suitability of proposed

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

crop/cropping systems with his existing resources
and other conditions. Thereby, they justify choosing
or rejecting a crop/cropping systems. This process
enables the farmers to undertake a SWOT analysis
internally which in turn guides them to take an ap-
propriate decision.

1.4. Climatic factors

Climate and agriculture

« Monsoon isa key source of water in agriculture

« Most of our rivers are seasonal fed by the mon-
soon; even irrigated agriculture depends on
monsoon.

« Cropping pattern has evolved over years based
on climate.

« Market forces influence cropping patterns in
recent times.

Climatic factors and crops

« Rainfall drives water availability and deter-
mines sowing time (rainfed crops).

« Temperature drives crop growth, duration and
influences milk production in animals.

« Temperature and relative humidity influence
pest and diseases incidence on crops, livestock
and poultry.

« Wet and dry spells cause significant impact on
standing crops, physiology, loss of economic
products (e.g. fruit drop).

+ Extreme events (e.g. high rainfall, floods, heat /
cold wave, cyclone, hail, frost) cause enormous
losses of standing crops, livestock and fisheries.

Climate and seasons

« Rainy (June-September) season also known
as Kharif, supports most of the rainfed crops
(coarse cereals, pulses, oilseeds, etc.).

« Post-rainy (October-February) season also
known as Rabi, supports the irrigated or stored
moisture grown crops (wheat, mustard, chick-
pea, etc.).

« Summer season (March-May) supports short
duration pulses and vegetables.

« Rabi production is more assured, has a higher
yield and reduces pest and disease related prob-
lems.

« Over time, with irrigation development, the
contribution of Kharif is declining and Rabi is
increasing.

Climate, cropping pattern and agricul-
tural production issues

Cropping patterns based on climate and land
capability are sustainable but market forces and
farmers’ aspirations are forcing unsustainable
systems.

Farmers must innovate in producing more even
from less endowed areas by adopting suitable
technologies to cope with changing climate.
Climate change will likely to cause further
problems in our crop production and is likely
to become the most important environmental
issue in the 21st century.

Important agricultural related factors
responsible for climate change

Deforestation and forest degradation

Burning of fuel and farm waste

Water logged condition

Excessive use of external input

Large-scale conversion of land for non-agricul-
tural purpose

Impact of climate change in India

Rainfall: No long-term trend noted. However,
regional variations seen, increased summer
rainfall and less number of rainy days.
Temperature: About 0.6 °C rise in surface tem-
perature during 100 years. Projected to increase
3.5 to 5 °C by 2100.

Carbon dioxide: Increasing at the rate of 1.9
ppm per year and expected to reach 550 ppm
by 2050 and 700 ppm by 2100.

Extreme events: Increased frequency of heat
wave, cold wave, droughts and floods observed
during last decade.

Rising sea level: Rise of 2.5 mm/year since 1950.
Glaciers: Rapid melting of the glaciers in the
Himalayas.

Rainfall distribution: Shift in peak rainfall dis-
tribution also noticed in some parts of country.

Expected impact of climate change on
agriculture

Due to increase in temperature, crop may re-
quire more water.
Yield may be reduced in cereal crops especially
in Rabi; i.e. wheat.

subi AT
Impact of Flood

Cold wave damage to chana harvest


General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops

Change in pest and disease scenario
due to climate change

Due to increase in rainfall: Pests like bollworm,
red hairy caterpillar and leaf spot diseases may
increase.Due to increase in temperature: Suck-
ing pests such as mites and leaf miner may in-
crease.

Due to variation in rainfall and temperature:
Pest and diseases of crops to be altered because
of more enhanced pathogen and vector devel-
opment, rapid pathogen transmission and in-
creased host susceptibility. Sometimes a minor
pest may become a major pest.

Agricultural biodiversity is also threatened by
decreased rainfall and increased temperature,
sea level rise and increased frequency and se-
verity of drought, cyclone and flood. Quality
of farm products such as fruits, vegetables, tea,
coffee, aromatic and medicinal plants may be
affected.

Water

Demand for irrigation to increase with in-
creased temperature and higher amount of
evapo-transpiration. This may result in lower-
ing of groundwater table at some places.

The melting of glaciers in the Himalayas will
increase water availability in the Ganga, Brah-
maputra and their tributaries in the short-run
but in the long-run the availability of water will
decrease considerably.

A significant increase in runoff is projected in
the rainy season, however, may not be very ben-
eficial unless storage infrastructure could be
vastly expanded. This extra water in the rainy
season, on the other hand, may lead to increase
in frequency and duration of floods.

The water balance in different parts of India will
be disturbed and the quality of ground water
along costal track will be more affected due to
intrusion of sea water.

Soil

Organic matter content, which is already quite
low in Indian soil, would become even lower.
Quality of soil organic matter may be affected.
Reduction in rate of decomposition and nutri-
ent supply.

Increase in soil temperature may reduce Nitro-
gen availability due to volatilization and deni-
trification.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Change in rainfall volume and frequency as
well as wind may alter the severity, frequency
and extent of soil erosion.
Rise in sea level may lead to salt water entry in
the coastal lands turning them less suitable for
conventional agriculture.

Livestock

Affect feed production and nutrition of live-
stock. Increased temperature would reduce di-
gestibility. Increased water scarcity would also
decrease the food and fodder production.
Major impacts on vector-borne diseases
through expansion of vector populations dur-
ing rainy years, leading to large outbreaks of
diseases.

Increase water, shelter, and energy require-
ment of livestock for meeting projected milk
demands.

Climate change is likely to aggravate heat stress
in dairy animals, adversely affecting their re-
productive performance.

Fishery

Increased sea and river water temperature is
likely to affect fish breeding, migration and har-
vest.

Impacts of increased temperature and tropical
cyclonic activity would affect capture, produc-
tion and marketing costs of the marine fish.

Coping options for farmers

Access to information

Progressive Farmers

ATMA extension functionaries - Block Tech-
nology Manager, SMS, farmer friend, Farm
School

Trained input dealers

Agri Clinics and Agribusiness Centers

KVK

Agricultural Research Stations

Agricultural Universities

ICAR Organisations

Kissan Call Centers (Toll free no.1551 or 1800
- 180 - 1551)

Concerned NGOs

Agribusiness Companies

Radio, TV, Agricultural Magzines, Community

Radio, Newspapers, Agricultural Websites etc.

Enlarging the Food Basket

¢ Diversifying the livelihood sources.

¢ Changing cropping patterns.

¢ Increased traditional coping strategies.

« Change to a mixed cropping pattern.

E.g: Crop Mixture-Nutri Millets, Pulses and Oilseed

Integrated Farming System

« Increased share of non-agricultural activities
E.g: Type of Integrated Farming Systems

Agriculture +vegetable cultivation

Agriculture + animal husbandry

Neem, Mulberry & Cowpea

« Planting more drought tolerant crops and in-
creased agro-forestry practices.

« Agro-forestry systems to provide more sta-
ble incomes during years of extreme weather

events.

Mango, Pumpkin, maize mixed
cropping

Mixed farming/Multi level farming


Coping options for farmers continued...

Lucerne & Sunhemp for green
manuring & fodder

Farm Pond

Conservation Furrow

« Improved on-farm soil & water conservation.
« Adopting scientific water management, nutri-
ent management and cultural practices.

Vegetative Barriers

Percolation Tanks


General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops

Coping options for farmers continued....

Contour trenching for runoff collec-
tion

Conventional Raised Bed Planting

e 20-25% Saving in irrigation water

Shelterbelts

« Shelterbelts reduce wind velocity.

* Moderate temperature.

« Reduce evaporative loss and conserve soil
moisture.

Straw Thatching

« Protecting young seedlings against cold by cov-
ering with straw thatching.

Frost Protection

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops

1.5. Soil and Water Conservation

So and water are our precious heritage. Hence,
it is obligatory on our part to protect and hand
over these resources to further generations. It is
estimated that about 50% of the cultivated area in
India suffers from severe soil erosion and requires
remedial measures.

¢ Water resources are essential for increasing and
stabilizing crop production.

¢ Wind erosion has been responsible for destroy-
ing the valuable top soil.

1.5.1. Degradation of soil and water
takes place with water and wind ero-
sion

¢ The main cause of water erosion is unmanaged
runoff.

¢ Runoff is the portion of the rainfall or irriga-
tion water applied which leaves a field either as
surface or as subsurface flow.

Several factors are responsible for runoff

¢ Climatic factors: Precipitation characteristics -
duration, intensity, distribution, direction, tem-
perature, humidity, wind velocity.

¢ Watershed characteristics: Geological shape of
the catchments, size and shape of the catch-
ments, topography, drainage pattern.

¢ Barren land without vegetation

¢ Soil types:

« Sandy soil: Average rain - no problem of
erosion. High intensity - More serious of
less binding material i.e. fine soil particle.

¢ Clay soil: Ordinary rain - more runoff in
moderate and steep slopes but high water
holding capacity.

¢ Silt loam, loamy and fine sandy loam: More
desirable soils from the point of view of
minimizing soil erosion.

How vegetation reduces runoff

¢ Interception of rainfall

¢ Root structure

¢ Biological influences

¢ Transpiration effects

¢ Intercept, absorb the impact of raindrop

¢ Hindrance to runoff water slows down the rate
at which travels down the slope

¢ Knitting and binding effect aggregates the soil

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

into granules

« Die and decay increase pore space and water
holding capacity

« One cubic meter of soil has several kilometres
of root fibre

« More vegetative cover, most active soil fauna,
channels of earth worm, beetles and other life

« Vegetation increases the storage capacity of
the soil for rainfall by the transpiration of large
quantities of moistures from the soil

Soil erosion

Soil erosion is the detachment and transportation
of soil material from one place to another through
the action of wind, water in motion or by the hitting
action of the rain drops.

« When the vegetation is removed and land is
put under cultivation the natural equilibrium
between soil building and soil removal is dis-
turbed.

« The removal of surface soil takes place at a
much faster rate than it can be built up by the
soil forming process.

Erosion by water: Known as water erosion, is
the removal of soil from the lands surface by water
in motion.

Sheet erosion: The removal of a thin relatively

uniform layer of soil particles by the action of rain-

fall and runoff.

« Extremely harmful

« Usually so slow that the farmer is not conscious
of its existence

*« Common on lands having a gentle uniform
slope

« Results in the uniform removal of the cream of
the top soil with every heavy rain

« Shallow top soil overlies a tight sub soil are most
susceptible to sheet erosion

« Movement of soil by rain drop splash is the pri-
mary cause of sheet erosion

« Sheet erosion has damaged millions of hectares
of slopping land throughout the India

Rill erosion is the removal of soil by running wa-

ter with the formation of shallow channels that can

be smoothed out completely by normal cultivation.

« There is no sharp lines of demarcation where
sheet erosion and rill erosion begins but rill
erosion is more readily apparent than sheet ero-
sion.

Shelterbelts for Moderating microclimate

e Rills develop when there is a concentration
of runoff water which, if neglected, grow into
large gullies.

¢ More serious in soils having a loose shallow top
soil.

¢ Transition stage between sheet erosion and gul-

lying.

Gully erosion: Removal of soil by running wa-
ter with the formation of channels that cannot be
smoothed out completely by cultivation.

« Advance stage of rill erosion.

« Any concentration of surface runoff is a poten-
tial source of gullying.

« Cattle paths, cart tracks, dead furrows, tillage
furrows or other small depression down a slope
favour concentration of flow.

¢ Unattended rills deepen and widen every year
and begin to attain the form of gullies.

« Unattended gullies may result over a few years
for an entire landscape to be filled with a net-
work of gullies.

¢ More spectacular than other type of erosions.

Stream channel erosion: Erosion caused by
stream flow.

« Closely resembles rill erosion.

e Intensive channel erosion areas are on the
outside of lands where flow shear stresses are
high.

Mass movement: Enmass movement of soil.
« Landslides, land slips, soil and mudflows are
various forms of mass movement.

Wind erosion: Movement of soil particles is
caused by wind force exerted against or parallel to
surface of the ground.

1.5.2. Conservation

Conservation is the utilization without wastage of
resources is required to ensure a high level of pro-
duction.

Important soil conservation measures are
¢ Conservation Tillage

¢ Minimum tillage

« Zero tillage

« Stubble mulching

¢ Trash farming


General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops

Conservation farming « Bench terrace

« Farming across the slope « Water harvesting and recycling
¢ Strip cropping

¢ Rotations

e Mixed cropping and intercropping
¢ Surface mulching

¢ Timely farm operations

« Improved water user efficiency

¢ Land levelling

¢ Providing safe drainage

Zero tillage

¢ Several practices are in use such as zero till-
age, minimum tillage and direct seeding.

¢ Planting crops in previously untilled soil by
opening a narrow slot, trench or band only
of sufficient width and depth to obtain seed
coverage. No other soil tillage is done.

¢ Intermittent terraces Advantages of zero tillage farming
+ Growing vegetation on the bunds ¢ Erosion control: Retained stubble and crop
residue reduces soil erosion and enhances

Vegetation and vegetative management
¢ Strip cropping

e Stubble mulching

¢ Mulching

soil fertility

¢ Moisture conservation: Stubble traps water,
reduce runoff water, better infiltration lead-
ing to improved soil moisture condition

¢ Higher nitrogen availability

¢ Seedling protection: Stubbles protects young
seedling from wind and heat

¢ Crop yields will be on par with traditional
tillage system. However good yield can be
harvested during dry years

Wind erosion management

¢ Protect the soil surface with a cover of vegeta-
tion or vegetative residues.

¢ Produce or bring to the surface soil aggregates
or clods which are large enough to resist the

wind force. . e Reduce labour and save time
¢ Roughen the land surface to reduce wind veloc- » Savings on equipment cost
ity and trap drifting soil. . ; e Savings on oil/fuel cost
¢ Establish barriers or trap strips at intervals to
reduce wind velocity and soil drifting. Mulching: Benefits of crop residue mulch-
Best practices to control soil blowing ing are oui .
. ¢ Increased availability of water and organic
« Deep ploughing matter

¢ Summer ploughing
¢ Surface roughness
¢ Conserving moisture

* Wind breaks and shelterbelts Additional benefit to farmers
« Mechanical or vegetative barriers + Less drought susceptibility

For instance: Shelterbelts for moderating micro- ° Improved soil quality and fertilizer efficiency
climate + Minimises long term dependency on external

¢ Shelterbelts reduce wind velocity inputs
¢ Moderate temperature
e Reduce evaporative loss and conserve soil

e Less erosion
e Environment protection

moisture

Water erosion can be managed by
¢ In situ water harvesting
¢ Summer ploughing

Overland flow management
¢ Contour bund

e Graded bund

¢ Broad based bund

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops

1.6. Irrigation

A n adequate water supply is important for plant

growth. When rainfall is not sufficient, the

plants must receive additional water from irriga-
tion.

Points consider for irrigation decisions

¢ Land suitability for irrigation like slope

« Effective rainfall: Part of the total rain is useful
for crop production

« When to irrigate: Decide based on soil, crop
and climatic condition

« How much to irrigate: Decide based on crop
water requirement

« How to irrigate: Select appropriate method for
irrigation

¢ Quality of irrigation water

1.6.1. Various methods can be used to
supply irrigation water to the plants

¢ Surface irrigation:
- Basin irrigation
¢ Furrow irrigation
¢ Sprinkler irrigation
¢ Drip irrigation

Surface Irrigation
Surface irrigation is the application of water by
gravity flow to the surface of the field.

« Either the entire field is flooded (Basin Irriga-
tion) or the water is fed into small channels
(furrows) or strips of land (borders).

Basin Irrigation
« Basins are flat areas of land, surrounded by
low bunds.

« The bunds prevent the water from flowing
to the adjacent fields.

« Basin irrigation is commonly used for rice
grown on flat lands or in terraces on hill-
sides. Paddy grows best when its roots are
submerged in water. Hence, basin irrigation
is the best method to use for this kind of
crop.

« Trees can also be grown in basins, where
one tree is usually located in the middle of a
small basin.

« In general, the basin method is suitable for
crops that are no affected by standing in

water for longer periods.

Basin irrigation is suitable for many field
crops.

Crops suitable for basin irrigation include
pastures, citrus, banana and crops that are
broadcasted such as cereals and to some
extent row crops such as tobacco.

Basin irrigation is generally not suited to
crops, which cannot stand in wet or water-
logged conditions for periods longer than 24
hours; eg: potatoes, beet root and carrots
The flatter the land surface, the easier it is to
construct basins.

It is also possible to construct basins on
sloping land, even when the slope is quite
steep. Level basins, called terraces, can be
constructed like the steps of a staircase.
Soils suitable for basin irrigation depend on
the crop grown.

Basin should be small if the:

Slope of the land is steep

Soil is sandy

Stream size to the basin is small

Required depth of the irrigation application
is small

Field preparation is done by hand or animal
power

Basin can be large if the:

Slope of the land is gentle or flat

Soil is clay

Stream size to the basin is large

Required depth of the irrigation application
is large

Field preparation is mechanized

The land slope, the soil type, the available
stream size, the required depth of the ir-
rigation application and farming practices
mainly determine the shape and size of
basins

If the land slope is steep, the basin should be
narrow; otherwise too much earth move-
ment will be needed to obtain level basins.
Three other factors, which may affect basin
width, are depth of fertile soil, method of
basin construction, agricultural practices.
There are two methods to supply irrigation
water to basins: (i) The direct method: Ir-
rigation water is led directly from the field
channel into the basin through siphons,

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops

or bund breaks. (ii) The cascade method: « Irrigation water flows from the field channel
irrigation water is supplied to the highest into the furrows by opening up the bank of the
terrace, and then allowed to flow to a lower channel or by means of siphons or spiles.

terrace and so on. « Furrows must be on consonance with the slope,

soil type, stream size, irrigation depth, cultiva-
tion practice and field length.

« Uniform flat or gentle slopes are preferred for
furrow irrigation.

« On undulating land, furrows should follow the

Maintenance of basins

¢ Bunds are susceptible to erosion. This may
be caused by, for example, rainfall, flood or
the passing of people when used as foot-

paths. . . . land contours.

¢ Rats may dig holes in the sides of the bunds.

¢ Therefore, it is important to check the bunds Advantages of furrow irrigation
regularly, notice defects and repair them « Suitable for row crops and vegetables.
instantly, before greater damage is done. « Suitable for soils in which the infiltration

rates vary between 0.5 and 2.5 cm/hr.

« Ideal for slopes varying from 0.2 to 0.5 per
cent and a stream size of 1-2 liters/sec.

« Inareas requiring surface drainage or prone
to temporary water logging, furrows are
very effective.

« In areas where water for irrigation purposes.
is scarce, the practice of alternate or skip
furrow irrigation can save considerable
quantity of water without significantly af-
fecting yields.

Advantages of basin irrigation

¢ Conservation of rainfall and reduction in
soil erosion.

¢ High water application and distribution ef-
ficiencies.

¢ Useful in leaching of salts.

« Suitable to all close growing crops, row
crops and orchards.

Basin Irrigation

Furrow irrigation me

+ Furrows are small channels, which carry water Furrow Irrigation
down the land slope between the crop rows.

+ Water infiltrates into the soil as it moves along Sprinkler irrigation
the slope. Water is pumped through a pipe system and then

« The crop is usually grown on the ridges be- sprayed onto the crops through sprinkler heads.
tween the furrows.

¢ This method is suitable for all row crops and for
crops that cannot stand in water for long peri-
ods. Crops such as maize, sunflower, sugarcane,
and soybean can be irrigated by furrow irriga-
tion.

« Crops that would be damaged by inundation,
such as tomatoes, vegetables, potatoes, beans;
fruit trees like citrus and grape as well as broad-
casted crops like wheat.

Advantages

e« Water conservation

¢ Soil conservation

¢ Efficient use of water

« Saving of labour

« Early seed germination
« Fertigations

¢ Soil amendments

¢ Frost protection

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Cooling of crops
Higher pro+ductivity of crops

Response of different crops to sprinkler irrigation

Water is appre) Bajra 56 Ie
’ : ‘ Barley 56 16
>Atlowrate | : : ;
‘ . ‘ ‘ Bhendi 28 23
> Over a long period of time. C ob 40 3
> At frequent intervals an age
> Directly into the plant's root zone Cauliflower 35 12
Chillies 33 24
Drip Irrigation Cotton 36 50
Cowpea 19 3
Use of Sprinklers for different crops Fenugreek 29 25
Crop Type = CropExample = Garlic 28 6
Cereals Maize, Sorghum, Wheat, Jowar Gram 69 57
Flowers —__ Carnation, Jasmine, Marigold Groundnut 20 40
Oilseeds Groundnut, Mustard, Sunflower Jowar 55 34
Vegetables Onion, Potato, Radish, Carrot Lucerne 16 27
Fodders _ Asparagus, Pastures Maize 41 36
Pulses Gram, Pigeon pea, Beans Onion 33 23
Plantation Coffee, Rubber, Tamarind Potato 46 4
Fibre Cotton, Sesame Sunflower 33 20
Spices Cardamom Wheat 35 24
Ss 2
Ea £ o 2
(7) a 2 >
I 1 ot I
a}
py i
f A
, \\ \
¥ i \
i i i
i i
D a rs
v \R
i i Controller
— \e
rt Fh) =
i) Y « ei
i \ \
a c
———* i —__jy}
— — | — pes 25 me a PY
a = Shut-Off Valve ew

—<&—_To Main Water Supply

Lay out of Sprinkler Irrigation System


General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops

Drip irrigation A typical drip irrigation system consists of the

Water is conveyed under pressure through a pipe following components:

system to the fields, from where it is discharged ¢ Pump unit

slowly or at a pre designed rate. The latter can be ¢ Control unit

matched to the soil infiltration capacity through - Filtering unit

emitters or drippers that are located close to the Mainline and sub mainlines

root zone of the plants. Laterals
Emitters

ee 5

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Ground nut Flowering, Peg Formation and Pod Development
Sesame Blooming to Maturity

Sunflower Pre-flowering to Post-flowering

Soybean Blooming and Seed Formation

Onion Bulb Formation and Pre-maturity

Tomato Flowering and Fruit Setting

Chilies Flowering and Fruit Setting

Cabbage Head Formation

Potato Tuber Initiation to Maturity

Carrot Root Enlargement

Cotton Flowering and Boll Formation

Citrus Flowering, Fruit Setting and Fruit Enlargement
Mango Pre-flowering and Fruit Setting

Layout of micro irrigation system

10
ee ee ogy _¥ _¥ _f _¥ #9 11
? T ? 7, T 7 T 7 T v
O—k i I ; A ra ; ; no no I ra 1 nO
V 7 7 o
7 V 7 7 T v
8
O—*k i Wy ii ra rl é t 0 fi t ra t nM
2 RB &
fy is 7 LEGEND
if T i? fT 1Weter source 7 Flow control valve
LT 8 2 Pumpset 8 Submsin
2 4 5 2 Fettilizer applicator 9 Lstersl pipe
1 4 Filter 10 Emitter/dripper
5Watemete 11 Endcap

6 Msinline

Benefits of drip irrigation over surface irrigation

Mango 80.0 34.8 Pomegranate 98.0 45.0
Banana 52.0 45.0 Tomato 50.0 39.0
Grapevine 23.0 48.0 Watermelon 88.0 36.0


Benefits of drip irrigation over surface irrigation continued...

Lady’s finger 16.0 40.0 Sugarcane 133.3 49.3
Brinjal 14.0 53.0 Cotton 88.0 46.6
Chillies 44.0 62.0 Onion 53.8 46.1
Papaya 75.0 68.0 Potato 79.5 54.1

On-farm irrigation efficiency of different irrigation methods

ie Sg ae

uo na Ny

Efficiency %
oO

30%-60%

SF ds WwW
oolCOClhUhO

Flood Level Furrow Sprinkler Center Pivot Drip
Irrigation Methods
1.6.2. Centrally sponsored micro irrigation scheme

It is clear from the above diagram that drip irrigation is the most efficient irrigation in terms of water use
efficiency compared to all other methods. Flood irrigation method is found to be the most uneconomical
irrigation method in terms of water use efficiency when compared to all other methods.

In order to popularize micro irrigation, the Govt. of India is implementing the Micro Irrigation Scheme
through which interested farmers be supported. The farmers can approach nearest extension functionary.
The details are as follows:

Name of Scheme Micro Irrigation

Type Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS)

Year of Commencement 2005-06

Objectives To increase the area under efficient methods of irrigation viz. drip and

sprinkler irrigation as these methods have been recognized as the only
alternative for efficient use of surface as well as ground water resources.


Salient Features

Structure of Scheme

Funding Pattern

General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops

¢ Out of the total cost of the Micro Irrigation (MI) System, 40% will be
borne by the Central Government, 10% by the State Government and
the remaining 50% will be borne by the beneficiary either through
his/her own resources or soft loan from financial institutions.

« Assistance to farmers will be for covering a maximum area of 5 hec-
tare per beneficiary family.

« Assistance for drip and sprinkler demonstration will be 75% of the
cost for a maximum area of 0.5 ha per beneficiary, which will be met
entirely by the Central Government.

« The Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) will be involved in selecting
the beneficiaries.

« All categories of farmers are covered under the Scheme. However, it
needs to be ensured that at least 25% of the beneficiaries are small
and marginal farmers.

« The scheme includes both drip and sprinkler irrigation. However,
sprinkler irrigation will be applicable only for those crops where
drip irrigation is uneconomical.

« There will be a strong HRD input for the farmers, field functionaries
and other stakeholders at different levels.

« Moreover, there will be publicity campaigns, seminars/workshops at
extensive locations to develop skills and improve awareness among
farmers about importance of water conservation and management.

« The Precision Farming Development Centres (PFDCs) will provide
research and technical support for implementing the scheme.

« Supply of good quality system both for drip and sprinkler irrigation
having BIS marking, proper after sales services to the satisfaction of
the farmer is paramount.

Subsidy Pattern: Assistance is provided @ 50% (40% by the Government

of India and 10% by the State Government) for drip/sprinkler Irrigation

System. Assistance to the extent of 75% of the cost of demonstration is

provided up to a limit of 0.5 ha.

At the National level, National Committee on Plasticulture Applica-
tion in Horticulture (NCPAH) will be responsible for coordinating
the Scheme, while the Executive Committee of NCPAH will approve
the Action Plan. At the State level the State Micro Irrigation Com-
mittee will coordinate the programme, while at the District level the
District Micro Irrigation Committee will oversee the programme.

« The Scheme will be implemented by an Implementing Agency (IA),
appointed by the State Government, which will be the District Rural
Development Agencies (DRDAs) or any identified Agency, to whom
funds will be released to directly on the basis of approved district
plans for each year.

¢ ‘The IA shall prepare Annual Action Plan for the District which will

be forwarded by the DMIC and SMIC for approval by the Executive

Committee (EC) of NCPAH.

80:20 by the Centre and States

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops

Eligibility

Area of Operation

As indicated in column 5 above.

The focus will be on horticultural crops being covered under the Na-

tional Horticulture Mission in 24 States/UTs. A cluster approach will be
adopted. The focus has also been extended to non horticultural crops.

Procedure to Apply

lease of assistance.

1.6.3. Drainage

Drainage it is a removal of water from the field as a
moisture control mechanism.

« Drainage and irrigation are important aspects
to be understood by the farmers

« Drainage provides desirable environment in
the crop root zone

« Necessity of drainage is felt when there is excess
water in root zone

« Source of excess water are

« Uncontrolled irrigation

« Seepage loss from an unlined channel

« Ground water moving from a shallow aquifers

« Non maintenance of natural drainage system

Generally two types of drainage systems are adopt-
ed based on techno-economic feasibility:

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Project proposals are submitted through the State Government for re-

Surface drainage: Can be achieved by following
any one of the below method based on the need and
intensity of the problem.

« Land forming

+ Land smoothening

+ Land grading or levelling

« Bedding system

¢ Open ditches

Sub surface drainage: Can be achieved by fol-
lowing any one of the below method based on the
need and intensity of problem.

« Horizontal sub surface drains

«Vertical drainage

« Other methods like

« Mole drainage
« Seepage intercepting farm pond
¢ Bio drains

Subsurface
drainage system

outlet

AS (in some plants, referred to as a ‘kernel’)
is a small embryonic ’plant’ enclosed in a cov-
ering called the seed coat, usually with some ‘stored
food. Seeds fundamentally are a means of repro-
duction and most seeds are the product of ‘sexual
reproduction, which remixes genetic material and

¢ Breeder /Nucleus - 100%
¢ Foundation seed - 99.5%
¢ Certified seed - 99.0%

Required level of physical purity for certifica-
tion

« All crops - 98%

« Carrot - 95%
High pure seed percentage

‘phenotype variability’ that ‘natural selection’ acts ° Bhendi - 99,0 %
upon. « Sesame, soybean & jute - 97.0 %
¢ Ground nut - 96.0%

The seed is the basic input in agriculture upon
which other inputs are applied. A good vigorous
seed utilizes all the resources and realizes a reason-

¢ Free from other crop seeds
¢ Free from designated diseases like loose smut

able output to the grower. It is wealth to the farmer in wheal i. 1 like wil
since yesterday's harvest is tomorrow’s hope. Good + Free rom objectionable weed seed like wild
paddy in paddy

seed in good soil realizes a good yield. Moreover, it

is the link between two generations. « Have good shape, size, colour, etc. according to

specifications of variety

Functions of seeds e Have high physical soundness and weight
« Posses high physiological vigour and stamina
+ Nourishment of the embryo ¢ Posses high longevity and shelf life
+ _ Dispersal to a new location ¢ Have optimum moisture content for storage
« Dormancy during unfavourable conditions + Long term storage: 8% and below

cogs « Short term storage: 10-13%
Characteristics of good seed «Have high market value

« Genetically pure

Seed types and characteristics

| ea by the breeder and it is genetically pure 100%
ae

BreederSeed Produced by the breeder from nucleus seed 100% Yellow
Produced by the breeder seed under the supervi- 99.5% White
sion of the concerned seed certification agency

Azar Blue

Certified seed is the progeny of foundation seed 99.0%
and its production is supervised and approved by
certification agency.

The seed of this class is normally produced by the
State and National Seeds Corporation and Private
Seed Companies on the farms of progressive grow-
ers.

This is the commercial seed which is available to
the farmers.


Seed treatment

Seed treatment is usages of specific products and spe-
cific techniques to improve the growth environment
for the seed, seedlings and young plants. It ranges
from a basic dressing to coating and pelleting.

Seed dressing: This is the most common method
of seed treatment. The seed is dressed with either a
dry formulation or wet treated with a slurry or liq-
uid formulation. Dressings can be applied at both,
the farm and industries. Low cost earthen pots can
be used for mixing pesticides with seed or seed can
be spread on a polythene sheet. The required quan-
tity of chemical can be sprinkled on the seed lot and
mixed mechanically by the farmers.

Seed coating: A special binder is used with a for-
mulation to enhance adherence to the seed.

Seed Dressing

Seed pelleting: The most sophisticated Seed
Treatment Technology changes the physical shape
of a seed to enhance pelletability and handling. Pel-
leting requires specialized application machinery
and techniques and is the most expensive applica-
tion.

The farmer must take care of the fol-
lowing while buying the seeds

« When purchasing the seed farmer should ob-
tain a bill/cash memo wherein the lot number
and seed tag number is mentioned.

« After purchasing the seed, empty bag/packet
(pouches) and receipt should be kept safely.

« Out of purchased seed, 100 seeds are taken from
each purchased variety to test them for germi-
nation before sowing in the field. Knowing the
germination percentage, the farmer can decide
the seed rate when sowing in the field.

e

Pelleted Onion Seed

Recommendation of seed treatment for different crops contiued...

Root rot, wilt

Root rot disease

other insects /pests

Bacterial sheath blight

Trichoderma 5-10 gm/kg seed (before

Trichoderma spp. 4-6 gm/kg seed

For seed dress-
ing metal seed
dresser/earth-
ern pots or
polythene bags
are used.

For seed dress-

transplanting) ing metal seed
dresser/earth-
Pseudomonas flourescens 0.5% W.P. 10
Ik ern pots or
BPX polythene bags

are used.


General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops

Recommendation of seed treatment for different crops contiued...

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


| cee resort to cultivation of a number of crops
and rotate particular crop combinations. More
than 250 cropping systems are being followed in In-
dia, of which 30 cropping systems are more preva-
lent. Some of the important cropping systems are:

1. Sequential cropping system:

Growing crops in sequence within a crop year, one
crop being sown after the harvest of the other. For
example, rice followed by pigeonpea, pigeonpea fol-
lowed by wheat.

2. Intercropping System:
Growing more than one crop in the same area in
rows of definite proportion and pattern.

t Tah A:
Cereals + Legumes

The following intercropping practices
were found to be remunerative in India’s
groundnut growing states.

Groundnut + Red gram (6:1/4:1)
Groundnut + Soybean (6:2)
Groundnut + Sunflower (6:2/3:1)
Groundnut + Castor (9:2/3:1)
Groundnut + Sunflower (3:1/2:1)
Groundnut + Red gram (4:1)

Alley cropping

Is an agroforestry practice in which perennial, pref-
erably leguminous, trees or shrubs are grown simul-
taneously with an arable crop. The trees, managed as
hedgerows, are grown in wide rows and the crop is
planted in the interspace or ‘alley’ between the tree
rows.

During the cropping phase, the trees are pruned.
Prunings are used as green manure or mulch on the
crop to improve the organic matter status of the soil
and to provide nutrients, particularly nitrogen, to
the crop.

Alley Cropping and Silvipastur:
a. Season based cropping system

i. Kharif rice based cropping system

ii. Kharif maize based cropping system

iii. Kharif sorghum based cropping system

iv. Kharif millet based cropping system

v. Kharif groundnut based cropping system

vi. Winter wheat and chickpea based crop
ping system

vii. Rabi sorghum based cropping system

b. Mixed cropping

In order to minimise the risk and uncertainty of
mono cropping and to have sustainable yield and
income, farmers are advised to go for mixed crop-

ping.

Mixed Cropping


General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops

Integrated farming System (IFS)

To feed ever-increasing population of the country,
extensive cropping system give ways to intensive
cropping which are exploiting natural resources.
Therefore in future more thrust will be on efficient
natural resource management and sustainable pro-
duction system. This encompasses an animal com-
ponent, an perennial and annual crop component,
aqua culture, agro based production and processing
units. Integrated farming system typically involves:

« Many enterprises including animal component

« Planning is based on resource available

« It is purely location specific/farmer/holding
specific activity plan

« Very high resource use efficiency

« Sustainable farming

IFS - Duck & Fish rearing

Objectives of IFS

« To compliment and maximize use of by prod-
ucts

« To provide useful employment to all the family
members

¢ Maximizing land use
¢ Value addition

¢ Self sustainability
« Less dependence on external resources

Crop production in IFS

¢ Food crop should find a place

¢ Family food requirement should be planned

¢ Fodder production to meet the demand of ani-
mal component

« Specific enterprise based crops; e.g. mulberry/
sunflower linked to honey

¢ Infrastructure based cropping

¢ Sufficient employment to family members

Animal component in IFS

¢ One or more animal components or combina-
tion of animal component may be planned

« Complimentary enterprises should be identi-
fied

« Composting should be the interface between
animal and crop enterprises

« Market should be considered before hand

« Need based demand driven enterprises should
be prioritized

Allocation of resource in IFS

¢ List the resources available and required

¢ Prioritize the resources based on scarcity

e Resource demand will be prioritized based on
economic impact and sustainability

« Scares resource on the farm should be allocated
for the most important activity

¢ Recycling of resources should be planned

« Resource based contingent plan should be pre-
pared in advance. This will serve as a security
and sustainable alternative in case of crisis

Crops, Trees, Shrubs

Livestock

Biodigestor

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Meron of agriculture requires appro-
priate machinery for ensuring timely field
operations, effective application of agricultural in-
puts and reducing drudgery in agriculture.

Advantages of mechanization

e Increase cropping intensity

¢ Ensure large area coverage and timeliness

¢ Increasing farm labour productivity

¢ Increases crop productivity and profitability

First step in mechanization

¢ Get good hands on training

¢ Read manufacturer information

e Give attention to maintenance

¢ Understand dos and don'ts with respect to
equipments and machinery used

¢ Take utmost care in following safety tips given
in the manufacture information booklet.

Selection of farm machinery

« Select based on holding size

« Economic feasibility

« Availability of skilled labour to operate

+ Workout the feasibility of hiring v/s owning

« Decide between universal equipment v/s crop
specific equipment when multiple crops are
grown

+ If the initial investment is huge, think of com-
munity ownership/custom hire centres, etc.

Benefits of Agricultural Mechanization

Saving in seed 15-20
Saving in fertilizer 15-20
Saving in time 20-30
Reduction in labours 20-30
Increase in cropping intensity 5-20
Higher productivity 10-15

Substantial reduction in drudgery of farm
workers especially that of women

Farm Mechanisation Potential

Land Preparation

Wooden Plunk

Laser Guided Land Leveller

Field Operation of Tractor Drawn Disc Plough


General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


General Conditions for Cult


Threshing Equipments

Groundnut Pod Stripper Castor Sheller

Winnowing and Clearing Equipments

: aes

Seed Cleaner

Winnowing Fan


General Conditions for Cultivation of Crops

1.10. Good Agricultural Practices
(GAP)

Gr Agricultural Practices (GAP) are "prac-
tices that address environmental, economic and
social sustainability for on-farm processes, and which
result in safe and quality food and non-food agricul-
tural products".

What are GAP codes, standards and
regulations?

Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) codes, stand-
ards and regulations are guidelines which have
been developed in recent years by the food industry,
producers’ organizations, governments and NGOs
aiming to codify agricultural practices at farm level
for a range of commodities.

Why do GAP codes, standards and
regulations exist?

These GAP codes, programmes or standards exist
because of:

* Growing concerns about food quality and safe-
ty worldwide.

¢ Fulfilment of trade and government regulatory
requirements.

« Specific requirements especially for niche mar-
kets.

Objectives
« Ensuring safety and quality of produce in the
food chain.

« Capturing new market advantages by modify-
ing supply chain governance.

+ Improving natural resources used, workers'
health and working conditions to creating new
market opportunities for farmers and exporters
in developing countries.

The benefits of GAP codes

« Standards and regulations are numerous, in-
cluding food quality and safety improvement.

¢ Facilitation of market access.

« Reduction in non-compliance risks regarding
permitted pesticides, Maximum Residue Limits
(MRLs) and other contamination hazards.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

GAP related to crop protection

¢ Use resistant cultivars and varieties.

« Crop sequences, associations and cultural prac-
tices.

¢ Biological prevention of pests and diseases.

« Maintain regular and quantitative assessment
of the balance status between pests and diseases
and beneficial organisms of all crops.

« Adopt organic control practices where and
when applicable.

« Apply pest and disease forecasting techniques
where available.

« Determine interventions following considera-
tion of all possible methods and their short and
long-term effects on farm productivity and en-
vironmental implications. This will allow the
minimizing of agrochemicals, in particular, to
promote Integrated Pest Management (IPM).

« Store and use agrochemicals according to le-
gal requirements of registration for individual
crops, rates, timings, and pre-harvest intervals

« Ensure that agrochemicals are only applied by
specially trained and knowledgeable persons.

« Ensure that equipment used for the handling
and application of agrochemicals complies with
established safety and maintenance standards.

« Maintain accurate records of agrochemical use.

« Identify the GAP in each protection method.

Crop rotation systems
« Sequence crops by selecting pest host relation.
¢ Selected crop for rotation in order to break the
life cycle of pest (Jowar should be rotated with
pulses to combat striga weed).
« ‘The selected crop for rotation should not be the
food of previous crop pest.
¢ To select appropriate crops for rotation:
« Analyze the pest habitat
¢ Follow forecasts
« Monitor pest and natural enemies

Privilege resistant species

¢ Cultivate plant varieties which are less prone to
pest attack.

« ‘The resistant varieties reduce production cost.

« Pest resistant transgenic crops developed for
specific pest can be used. This is new avenue for
reducing pesticide load.

Seeding techniques

« Depth of placement

« Method of placement

« Time of placement

« Seed treatments

« Managing the above based on pest nature will
give good results

Promote useful animals

« Keep good predator population.

« Promote growth of beneficial insects.

* Create an environment congenial for predators;
e.g. keeping bird perch in the field.

« Identify the useful animals and study their hab-
itat for providing the required environment.

Observe and control populations

¢ Follow forecast-short term and long term.

« Study habitat of pest and congenial weather.

« Accordingly take necessary precautions to
manage pest.

Give priority to mechanical and biological

measures (instead of chemical)

« Get the full knowledge about botanical pesti-
cides.

« Get the knowledge on available parasites and
predator/friendly insects and pests.

« Accordingly develop action plan for mechani-
cal and biological measures.

« Use non cash inputs: Saves money.

¢ Use information on plant protection: Analyze
spatial and temporal distribution and trend
analysis.

Monitoring of performance through taking

notes each year/season.

« Keep the pest management record along with
season, weather and other agriculture activity.

« Document the pest load and control achieved

« Use this experience for future planning.

Precision farming: Use precision farming mod-
ules and apply Information Technology (IT) to
economize and for effective monitoring.

Good Agriculture Practices help the farmers to make
use of the opportunities available in International
Markets for selling their products and realising bet-
ter farm profits.

1.10. Lessons Learnt

IL,

Critical factors to be considered while de-
ciding the crops and cropping pattern are
climatic factors, soil conservation, water,
cropping system options, past and present
experiences of farmers, expected profit
and risk, economic conditions of farmers
including land holding, labour availability,
mechanization potential technology avail-
ability and suitability, demand and avail-
ability of market policies and schemes,
public and private extension influence,
availability of required agricultural inputs
including agricultural credit and post har-
vest storage and processing technologies.
Soil, water and wind erosion may be man-
aged through various recommended prac-
tices.

Method of irrigation has to be decided
considering the quantity of water available
and crop to be grown.

Recommended certified seeds may be
used.

Mechanisation enhances quality of agri-
cultural operations and minimises the cost
and dependence on labour.

Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) may
be considered essentials to enhance the
price and market competitiveness of the
produce.



2. Soil and Plant Nutrition

2.1. Objectives of the session

« To increase the awareness and understanding about the soil, its structure, physical, chemical and bio-
logical properties and soil fertility.

« To strengthen the farmer’s knowledge to manage the soil fertility in an economically and environmen-
tally sustainable manner.

2.2. What we know at the end of the session

« Soil composition

« Physical, chemical and biological characteristics of soil

¢ Soil testing

¢ Plant nutrition requirement

¢ Organic and inorganic fertilizers

« Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) for efficient, economic and sustainable production

physical factors: parent material, time, climate, or-
ganisms present and topography. The way in which
we manage soil is another major factor influencing
the character of the soil.
So is a thin layer of earth’s crust, which serves as
natural medium for the growth of plants. Rocks
are the important sources for the parent materials
over which soils are developed.

"25% Air
: 45% Mineral

Soil Constituents \ \
25% Water

5%.
om.

Soil Constituents

Soil features, properties and their im-
portance

Soil and Plants

Rocks, the source of parent matererial

Soil is a dynamic medium made up of minerals, or-
ganic matter, water, air and living creatures includ-

ing bacteria and earthworms. :

at .
Soil features and properties

It was formed and is forever changing due to 5 major


Soil and Plant Nutrition

Soil colour

Soil depth

Dark colour indicates usually medium to high
fertility due to high amount of organic matter.
These soils have usually high amount of nutri-
ents, good water holding capacity and structure
and are well aerated.

Light colour indicates medium to low fertil-
ity. These soils may have leaching issue (water
makes organic matter and other nutrients move
downward faster).

-0-

oe,

The depth of soil to which the roots of a plant
can readily penetrate to in order to reach water
and nutrients.

Minimum of 3-5 feet is desirable, deeper soils
are better because they can hold more nutrients
and water.

Layer

Soil Depth

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Soil texture

« Texture refers to relative proportion of miner-
al particles (sand, silt, and clay) in soil. Many
properties of soils; e.g. drainage, water holding
capacity, aeration and the nutrient availability;
depend largely on soil texture.

¢ Sandy: Low fertility and water holding capacity
but good aeration.

¢ Loamy: Medium fertility and good aeration.

« Clayey: High fertility and poor aeration, hard
to plough.

Sand

Soil Constituents

¢ Farmers may refer to their soil as heavy or light,
illustrating the ease of working. The heavy soils
are usually hard to plough and require much
more effort than light soils. Organic matter may
be added to improve the soil texture.

Soil and Plant Nutrition

Land slope

¢ Soil gradient is the angle of inclination of the soil surface from the soil.

¢ It is expressed in percentage, which is the number of feet raise or fall in 100 feet from the horizontal
distance.

¢ Mild gradient up to 1% is desirable.

¢ Higher gradients are not desirable as it leads to soil and water erosion.

¢ Perfect levelling is required only for paddy crop.

v - Vertical rise

5 Percent
1 2.2 4 6.7 20
< h=Horizontal distance
Land Slope
Soil pH Tips for soil pH management

Acid soils are to be corrected by using lime,
quantity of lime application is as per soil test
report.
« Alkali soils are to be corrected by gypsum/sul-
phur, quantity of application is as per soil test
report.
Saline - alkali soils should be treated with gyp-
sum and improved drainage.

¢ Soil pH is of utmost importance in plant growth
as it influences nutrient availability, toxicities
and the activity of soil organisms.

Soil organic matter

¢ Soil organic matter is the mix of plant and ani-
mal matter in different stages of decay.

¢ Soil organic matter plays a key role in biologi-
cal, physical, and chemical function in soil.

Soil organic matter helps by:

¢ Providing nutrients for soil organisms

« Acting as major reservoir of plant nutrients

« Making nutrient exchange between soil and
root of the plants easier

« Improving soil structure

¢ Influencing soil temperature

¢ Reducing the risk of soil erosion

"Basic pH, « Increasing water holding capacity

HH

Acid pH... Acid pH OH.

we
rs Neutral pH

Basic pH on

a

.

Soil organic matter can be improved

through:

« Recycling the crop residue back to field
without wasting and burning

« Applying compost

B,

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Soil and Plant Nutrition

Medium
acid

Slightly

Strongly acid acid

slighty
| acid |

Slightly | Medium
shy Strongly alkaline

a nitrogen
——

p Eras

era
potassium

eS
sulphur

——
a
magnesium
SS
= A
SE CS

a SS A CO

copper & zinc

on

an

5.0 5.5 6.0 as? _—

73

Effect of Soil pH on Nutrient Availability

« Applying various organic manures

e Mulching organic wastes

¢ Using green manures and cover crops
¢ Suitable crop rotation

¢ Reducing soil tillage

« Avoiding soil erosion

Carbon - Nitrogen Ratio (C:N Ratio)

There are chemical elements in the organic matter,
which are extremely important, especially in their
relation or proportion to each other. They are Car-
bon and Nitrogen. The relationship is called Car-
bon - Nitrogen Ratio (C:N Ratio). For example,
composed manure has 20:1 and sawdust has 400:1
of carbon and nitrogen. Generally speaking, the
legumes are highest in nitrogen and have low C:N
Ratio, which is highly desirable. Farmers can use
blood meal, bone meal, poultry manure, cottonseed
meal and soybean meal and other nitrogen rich ma-
terial as organic matter, which enhance the decom-
position.

Electrical Conductivity (EC): EC is normally consid-
ered to be a measurement of the dissolved salts in a
solution.

Through application of zypsum, the saline/sodic
soils can be amended. The quantity of zypsum to
be applied is decided by EC value. Farmers having
problem of saline/sodic soils can go for soil testing

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

and approach extension officials for further guid-
ance.

Salinity effect negli-
gible, except for more
sensitive crops

Yield of many crops
restricted

Only tolerant crops
yield satisfactorily
Only very tolerant
crops yield satisfacto-
rily

Soil fertility

+ Soil fertility is generally defined as “ability of
soil to supply plant nutrients” Soil structure,
soil texture, temperature, water, light and air
also play an important role in maintaining soil
fertility.

« Plant nutrients which are often scarce in soil
are nitrogen, potassium and phosphorus since
plants use large amounts for their growth and
survival.

¢ Important nutrients, their function and defi-
ciency symptoms are described below.

Nitrogen (N) - deficiency symptoms

1. Stunted growth.

2. Appearance of light green to pale-yellow col-
our on the older leaves, starting from the tips.
This is followed by death and/or dropping of
the older leaves depending upon the degree
of deficiency.

3. In acute deficiency, flowering is greatly re-

duced.

Lower protein content.

Phosphorous (P) - deficiency
symptoms

1. Overall stunted appearance, the mature
leaves have characteristic dark to blue-green
colouration, restricted root development.

In acute deficiency, occasional purpling of
leaves and stems; spindly growth.

. Delayed maturity and poor seed and fruit de-
velopment.

Potassium (K) - deficiency

symptoms

Chlorosis along the leaf margins followed
by scorching and browning of tips of older
leaves. These symptoms then gradually
progress inwards.

Slow and stunted growth of plants.

Stalks weaken and plant lodge easily.
Shrivelled seeds of fruits.

Potassium (K) - deficiency symptoms


Calcium (Ca)

1. Calcium deficiencies are not seen in the field
because secondary effects associated with
high acidity limit growth.

2. The young leaves of new plants are affected
first. These are often distorted, small and ab-
normally dark green.

3. Leaves may be cup-shaped and crinkled and
the terminal buds deteriorate with some
breakdown of petioles.

4. Root growth is markedly impaired; rooting of
roots occurs.

5. Dessication of growing points (terminal
buds) of plants under severe deficiency.

6. Buds and blossoms shed prematurely.

7. Stem structure weakened.

- deficiency symptoms

Magnesium (Mg) - deficiency

symptoms

1. Interveinal chlorosis, mainly of older leaves,
producing a streaked or patchy effect; with
acute deficiency, the affected tissue may dry
up and die.

2. Leaves usually small, brittle in final stages
and curve upwards at margin.

3. In some vegetable plants, chlorotic spot be-
tween veins, with tints of orange, red and
purple.

4. Twigs weak and prone to fungus attack, usu-
ally premature, leaf drop.

Sulphur (S) deficiency symptoms

1. Younger leaves turn uniformly yellowish
green or chlorotic.

2. Root growth is restricted, flower production
often indeterminate.

3. Stems are stiff, woody and small in diameter.

‘Sulphur (S) deficiency symptoms


Zinc (Zn) deficiency symptoms

1. Deficiency symptoms mostly appear on the
2nd or 3rd fully mature leaves from the top
of plants.

. Inmaize, from light yellow striping to a broad
band of white or yellow tissue with reddish
purple veins between the midrib and edges
of the leaf, occurring mainly in the lower half
of the leaf.

. In wheat, a longitudinal band of white or yel-
low leaf tissue, followed by interveinal chlo-
rotic mottling and white to brown necrotic
lesions in the middle of the leaf blade; even-
tual collapse of the affected leaves near the
middle.

. In rice, after 15-20 days of transplanting,
small scattered light yellow spots appear on
the older leaves which later enlarge, coalesce
and turn deep brown, the entire leaf becomes
rust-brown in colour and dries out within a
month.

. In citrus, irregular interveinal chlorosis; ter-
minal leaves become small and barrowed
(little-leaf); fruit-bud formation is severely
reduced, twigs die back plants.

Zinc (Zn) deficiency symptoms

Copper (Cu) - deficiency symptoms

1. In cereals, yellowing and curling of the leaf
blades, restricted ear production and poor
grain set, indeterminate tillering.

. Incitrus, die back of new growth; exanthema
pockets of gum develop between the bark
and the weed; the fruit shows brown spots.

Iron (Fe) - deficiency symptoms

1. Typical interveinal chlorosls; youngest leaves
first affected, points and margins of leaves
keep their green colour longest.

. In severe case, the entire leaf, veins and in-
terveinal area turn yellow and may eventually
become bleached.


Soil and Plant Nutrition

Boron (B) - deficiency symptoms

MANGANESE
DEFICIENCY

ms
Manganese (Mn) - deficiency symptoms

Molybdenum (Mo) - deficiency symptoms

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Boron (B) - deficiency symptoms

Death of growing plants (shoot tips).

The leaves have a thick texture, sometimes
curling and becoming brittle.

Flowers do not form and root growth is
stunted.

“Brown heart” in root crops characterized by
dark spots on the thickest part of the root or
splitting at centre.

Manganese (Mn) - deficiency
symptoms

1.

Chlorosis between the veins of young leaves,
characterized by the appearance of chlorotic
and necrotic spots in the interveinal areas.
Greyish areas appear near the base of the
younger leaves and become yellowish to yel-
low orange.

Symptoms of deficiency popularly known in
sugarcane as “streak” disease.

Molybdenum (Mo) - deficiency
symptoms

1.

Chlorotic interveinal mottling of the lower
leaves, followed by marginal necrosis and in
folding of the leaves.

In cauliflower, the leaf tissues wither leaving
only the midrib and a few small pieces of leaf
blade (“whiptail”).

Molybdenum deficiency is markedly evident
in leguminous plants.


Soil and Plant Nutrition

Some common deficiency symptoms are:

It is the loss of chlorophyll leading
to yellowing in leaves. It is caused by the defi-
ciency of elements like K, Mg, N, S, Fe, Mn, Zn
and Mo.

are death of tissues, particularly leaf
tissue is caused by deficiency of K, Ca, Mg

¢ deficiency of K and P.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Soil and Plant Nutrition

Stunted/Retarded plant growth caused
by the deficiency of N, P, K, Zn, Ca.

Delay in flowering due to deficiency of N, S
and Mo.

In case the farmers observe the above symptoms, farmers are advised to consult the local extension worker
for remedies.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


A. Soil Analysis: Key to a Successful

mportant chemical fertilizers are the source of .
Nutrient Management Plan

major nutrients. Different fertilizers and their

nutrient content are illustrated in the table below: H crop yields and quality of

Nutrient content (%) the crops depend largely on the ef-
ficient supply of nutrients. Soil provides
NO not only the medium but also functions

Pf as the source of these nutrients for the
0
0
0
7

plants. Soil resources get depleted with
every harvest and need to be replenished
for every crop. However, one must know
which nutrients are to what extent deplet-
ed and what addition of fertilizers should
be planned accordingly. Soil analysis, in
this regard, helps in determining the level
of nutrients and in deciding the required
amount of fertilizer application.

Accuracy of soil analysis is directly relat-
ed to the quality of the soil sample taken.
Application of appropriate fertilizers with
the proper nutrient mix will help not only
to increase the productivity and farm in-
come but also provide a more realistic
chance to obtain the desired yield. There
are various methods for taking a soil sam-
ple from a field. The right method of sam-
pling may be decided by consulting local
extension officer or your DESAI-trainer.

x|X |X X |X [X [xX
x] xX |X x x x x Xx
X|X |X x x xX
X| x [Xx x x X_|X Xx
regular staggerd start 4
systematic grid regular grid
diamond triangle systematic
hexagon systematic unaligned grid
‘Calcium ammonium nitrate- To be used with caution. Soil Sampling Methods

?Muriate of Potash- To be used with caution and protective equipment (Respirator)
*Diammonium Phosphate- To be used with caution.

4Sampurna- Compilation Source- Manufacturer (Zuari Agro Chemicals).
Vijaya Complex- Indigenous Complex Fertilizer.

° IFFCO Grade I- Compilation Source- Manufacturer

(To be used with caution.)

icrisat.org


Soil sampling: an illustration

Remove the surface litter at the

sampling spot

1inch/2.5cm 6 inches
(15 cm)

Collect soils - V shaped cut:
Remove thick slices of soil from top to bottom of exposed face of the
‘V’ shaped cut and place in a clean container

Quartering is done by dividing | Two opposite quarters are dis-
the thoroughly mixed sample| carded and the remaining is
into four equal parts mixed

Process of collection

Label with required information:

« Name of the farmer

« Location of the farm

« Survey number

« Previous crop grown, pre-
sent crop

« Crop to be grown in the next
season

« Date of collection

« Name of the sampler, etc

Make a ‘V’ shaped cut to a depth
of 15 cm in the sampling spot

Collect the sample in a clean
cloth or polythene bag

Places for soil testing:

Krishi Vigyan Kendra
(KVK)

State/district agricultural
labs

Agriculture University, Re-
search Stations

ATMA Officials/Agri-
preneurs


Soil and Plant Nutrition

B. Plant Analysis

lant Analysis is the second tool, after soil test-

ing that is critical to improve crop nutrition and
yield. Only plant analysis can identify the actual
nutrient status of a plant or crop. While soil testing
identifies the nutrients offered to the crop or plants,
Plant analysis identifies how well the plants utilizes
the soil nutrients and applied nutrients. Plant analy-
sis allows the plant to tell us what nutrients it needs.

It is critical that the correct plant part and stage of
growth be sampled. The normal nutrient concentra-
tion differs between the various plant parts. Also,
the normal nutrient concentration of each plant
part changes as the plant matures. It is important
to keep these factors in mind to assess the nutrients
status of plants. The plant parts required to be col-
lected for different crops are as follows.

C. Irrigation Water Analysis

[us water, irrespective of its source, always
contains some soluble salts. The suitability of wa-
ters for a specific purpose depends upon the types
and amounts of dissolved salts. Some of the dis-
solved salts or other constituents may be useful for
crops but the quality or suitability of water for irri-
gation purposes is assessed in terms of the presence
of undesirable constituents. Some of the dissolved
ions such as NO3 are useful for crops.

The most important characteristic that de-
termine the quality of irrigation water are:

« pH

« Total concentration of soluble salts are judged

through Electrical Conductivity (EC).

¢ Relative proportion of sodium to other cations
such as Ca and Mgare referred toas Sodium
Adsorption Ratio (SAR).

« Concentration of boron or other elements that
may be toxic to plants.

« Concentration of carbonates and bi-carbonate
as related to the concentration of calcium plus
magnesium are referred to as Residual Sodium
Carbonate (RSC).

« Content of anions such as chloride, sulphate
and nitrate.

Methods of water sample collection

As water quality and suitability plays an important
role in deciding production and productivity of
crops, farmers are advised consult extension worker
to test the water.

ee ee es
quirement and

(a) Seedling, 6” to12” Entire above ground portion 15-20 plants _ productivity

tall of plant.
Keeping soil
b) Prior to or at first li
(b) bloom Youngest fully mature leaves fertility ; and
from the main stem of plant. 15 — 20 leaves soil nutrients
(c) When first squares Discard the petioles. at optimum
appear level helps in-
2 Months to mature Second fully mature leaf | 15 to 25leaves| creasing _the
without sheath. productiv-
(a) Seedling stage Entire above ground portion 15 to 20 plants ity of the soil.
of plant. ainough tre
ability o e
(b) Vegetative to full Youngest fully mature leaf. 15 to 20 leaves soil i supply
iole.

bloom No petiole the plants with

the required
nutrients depends also on the soil condition like i.e.
soil texture, soil structure and soil organic matter.
Therefore, soil fertility management does not only
include nutrient management but also soil condi-
tion management.

Apart from other soil management practices,

soil fertility focuses on:

e Maintain a balance between nutrient uptake
and nutrient application.

« Adequate fertility for the plants at the specific
growth stages.

¢ Soil fertility and organic matter maintenance

¢ Minimizing the nutrient loss by avoiding excess
application.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


The soil nutrient demand usually is based on: ( eneral considerations before fertilizer applica-

¢ Soil nutrient level tion:

¢ Crop variety and yielding ability « Nutrients and not fertilizers should be bought.
¢ Soil moisture (Think nutrients, not fertilizers).

¢ Targeted yield « Each nutrient applied as fertilizer should give a

; — ; desired production response.
Soil analysis direct the farmer on quantity andqual- . 7, e cost of fertilization must be calculated on

ity of fertilisers to be used. Farmers can get the crop the basis of applied plant nutrients per unit area
specific nutrient (fertilizer) recommendations af- of land.

ter consulting the local extension service or their
DESAI-trainer and discussing with them the soil
analysis report.

« Calculate one nutrient at a time, considering
available sources, prices and feasibility of using.

« Asample Soil Health Card, issued to the farm-

eye ers based on the soil test results, should be used
C. Recommended Fertilizer Dose for by the farmer to calculate the quantities of fer-

Important Crops tilizers required:

Apply 50% extra fertilizers at 2nd , 4th, 6th & 8th
months after planting for tissue culture banana
60 60 (TCHB - 213)

0.6kgs 0.2kgs 0.3kgs From 6th year onwards

1.0 = 10kg  1.5kg Kg of NPK/tree for 6th year onwards

- 112.5
90 60 _—_ Irrigated Hybrid
40 50 40 Rainfed/Varieties
If the samples are all above the critical
Soil Health Card — Macro Nutrients . .
Farmer's Name: Date: level, there is no deficiency of any ele-
Mandal: ment.
District:
Spe] [|S = conemty | Coo | ose | Aomm “SLSCL CL
‘Sampe TARE (205) «2
wae ‘Vaue |] Saws | Gypeun | Vaue | Sams re Vaue las
Sm 0.65 0.70
0.20 0.30
4
4.00 6.00
2.00 3.00

Signature of the Scientist

Fertilizers: Chemical or Organic
Soil Health Card — Micro Nutrients

Farmer's Name: pate: Chemical fertilizers
Village: .
Mandal: Advantages:
Eee sae « Nutrients are immediately avail-
= = = = able for plant uptake.
« Price is lower as compared to or-
ganic fertilizer.
« Small quantities are required be-
Signature of the Scientist

cause they are nutrient rich.


Soil and Plant Nutrition

Disadvantages: Fertilizer application methods
« Over application usually results in economic .
and environmental losses. Broadcasting: fertilizer is distributed manually
+ Over supply makes plant tissues soft and vul- over the cropped field.
nerable to diseases and pathogens. « The most common fertilizer application
« Increased rate of soil organic matter decompo- method.
sition resulting in soil degradation. « Highly inefficient method
¢ Many nutrients applied are easily lost through ¢ High economic and nutrient losses
different chemical reactions.
Organic fertilizers ~~
Advantages:

« Balanced nutrient supply.

« Enhance the soil biological activity.

¢ Help in improving soil structure.

¢ Increase the organic matter content.

« Slow release of nutrients makes soil on the long
run fertile.

« Help in combating plant diseases.

Broadcasting
Disadvantages

¢ Low nutrient content.

Placement: application in band or packets near
¢ Only effective in the long run.

the plants.
« It may not supply all the nutrients required for + Two sub-types:
plant growth. i. Band application
. High cost. ii. Spot Application
¢ Bulkiness. ¢ The fertilizer use efficiency is high.
Efficient fertilizer use ° Labour intensive. ca: ;
Good knowledge and management practices can « Efficient method but with high labour input.

improve the fertilizer use efficiency.

« Select the crops and varieties that suit the local-
ity and have best fertilizer response.

« Select right kind of fertilizer according to crop
and soil.

¢ ‘The fertilization should be planned for the
cropping pattern and not for single crops.

«Fertilization application rate should be decided
only after discussing your soil analysis report
with your local extension officer or Desai-
Trainer.

¢ Balanced fertilization should be practiced.

« Crops should only be sown at the locally rec-
ommended periods.

« Maintain optimum plant population and prop-
er plant spacing.

« Effective control of pests and diseases will help
in maximizing the fertilizer efficiency.

« To maximize the yield increase through ferti-
lizer, all other growth critical factors must also
be optimum e.g. crop must be irrigated at criti-
cal growth stages.

Placement

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Soil and Plant Nutrition

Ring application: Spread the fertilizer around
the tree at a distance of about one meter.

+. 0 5

Ring Application

Foliar application: liquid fertilizers are sprayed
on the crops.

Foes Feed

Foliar Application

¢ Highly efficient

¢ Special equipment required

¢ High cost

« Only selected fertilizers can be applied

Fertigation along with irrigation

Fertigation

Method of application and nutrients

The method of application should be chosen ac-
cording to the nutrient, crop, soil and cultivation
method.

¢ Nitrogen application should be applied in splits
and slow release mode to minimize loss.

¢ Frequent application in small quantity through
foliar application is most efficient and results in
quick recovery of crops.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

« Use slow release nitrogen for plantation crops
and long duration crops.

« Under puddle condition, use coated urea-neem
oil. Coal tar sulphur coating will make urea to
release nitrogen slow to match the uptake pat-
tern.

« Urea can be cured with soil (1 part urea with
5-10 parts soil) to reduce the losses.

« Phosphate should be placed 4 to 6 cm below
and 4 to 6 cm away from the seeds to ensure
maximum availability.

« Phosphatic fertilizers give better response when
placed in bands near the plant rows.

« Potassic fertilizers can be applied in one dose
as basal application but for long duration crops
the fertilizer application may be done in 2 to 3
splits.

Fertilizer calculations

Here is an example for the application of fertilizers
based on the soil test recommendations. Suppose
the recommendations are 120 kg N, 60 Kg P and 40
Kg K per ha. Calculate the quantity of urea, super-
phosphate and muriate of potash fertilizers needed
to supply the recommended doses!

Urea content is 46%, so to supply 46 kg N/ha
100 kg urea is required. To supply 120 kg N/ha
100/46*120=260.9 or 261 kg urea is required. Simi-
larly super phosphate content is 16% P205 and the
recommendation is given in the form of Phospho-
rous.

+ % P = %P205 X 0.44
+ KgP=kgP205 X 0.44
+ KgP=16X0.44

+ KgP=7.04

So super phosphate contains 7.04 P and the recom-
mendation is given as 60 kg P.

To supply 60 kg P=100/7.04*60=852.27 or 852 kg
single super phosphate is required. Similarly, we
have to calculate the dose of potash through Muri-
ate of Potash (MOP) as MOP contains 60% K2O.

So MOP contains 49.8 K and the recommendation
given is 40 kg K/ha.

To supply 40 kg K=100/49.8*40=80.3 kg or 80 kg
MOP is required. So based on fertilizer analysis and
soil test information the fertilizer application rates
are calculated as above.

Soil and Plant Nutrition

The formula for calculating the fertilizer to be
applied (kg/ha) =

X recommended
dose (kg/ha)

Nutrient content in the
fertilizer material (%)

Nutrient cost comparison
Example - 1

1. Urea with 46% N costs Rs.562.20 per 100 kg.
2. Ammonium sulphate 20% N costs Rs.1029 per
100 kg.

Urea has 46% N i.e. 46 kg N in every 100 kg urea.
Therefore unit value of N in urea: 562.2/46= Rs.12.22
per kg N. Ammonium sulphate has 20.6% N i.e. 20
kg N in every 100 kg fertilizer and 24% sulphur.
Therefore unit value of N in ammonium sulphate:
1029/20.6= Rs.49.95 per kg N. Thus, the nitrogen is
cheaper in urea. Yet, ammonium sulphate also has
24% sulphur in it.

Therefore, for soils with sulphur deficiency, am-
monium sulphate is a better choice and for soils
with normal sulphur levels, urea presents a better
N source.

Example - 2

1. Single Super Phosphate (SSP) with 7 % P
costs Rs.480 per 100 kg.

2. Di- Ammonium Phosphate (DAP) 20% P
and 18% N costs Rs.1596 per 100 kg.

SSP has 7% P i.e. 7 kg P in every 100 kg SSP. There-
fore unit value of P in SSP: 480/7= Rs.68.57 per kg P.

Whereas, DAP has 20% P and 18% N, ie. 20 kg P
and 18 kg of N in every 100 kg of DAP.

Cost of Nitrogen in 100 kg of DAP = (18 X 12.22) =
Rs.219.96. Therefore unit value of P in DAP: (1596
— 219.96 = 1376.00); i.e. 1376/20= Rs.68.80 per kg P

Thus, the unit cost of P is the same in both the ferti-
lisers. Yet, DAP also has 18% N in it. Therefore, for
soils with nitrogen requirement, DAP is the better
choice.

GUIDE FOR MIXING FERTILIZERS

<= <= & Oy Oy © © @ @ D @
A a c¢ %® s 28 coc a &3 8S
6 os 2¢2 ££ 2 €&€§ > & 6 6 5
a a € a c Re fe g DB 2
Ss 6 s&s § € S&S o £ & &
2 2 ¢ € 5 8 Pe SB E
© © 9 is) & = €
qe ds 2 € Ca) € a 5 2
= 2£ € ¢€ 2 2 ¢§ 2
F @ F SF BF £ ¢& Ss)
= . 7) £ S) o € <
v 3 4 gs < ~
oO a o :
& g 8
. Qa
o B
od
Kk 6 6 1. Muriate of Potash
<a 4] 2. Sulphate of Potash
| Hs 3. Sulphate of ammonia
Kk 6 6 i | x) a 4. Calcium ammonium nitrate
x) 5. Sodium Nitrate
x) B 8 & | i | 6. Calcium cynanamide
kX kX x &] 7. Urea
| HM =s_s8. Superphosphate single or triple
Kh kK H = Hf 9.Ammonium phosphate
| i | | i | 10. Basic slag
Y | | i | 11. Calcium carbonate

Fertilizers which can be mixed
XI Fertilizers which may be mixed shortly before use
@ Fertilizers which can not be mixed

Note: The crossing point of the required vertical column and horizontal colum indicates the possibility of mixing or otherwise

of the fertilizer

Compatibility of Fertilizers

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Soil and Plant Nutrition

Organic fertilizers

Organic manures are natural products used to pro-
vide the nutrients to crops. Examples of organic
manure are cow dung, farmyard manure, green ma-
nure, compost from crop residues, vermicompost
and other biological waste.

Organic manures increase the organic matter in the
soil. Organic matter in turn releases the plant food
in available form for the use of crops. However, or-
ganic manures should not be seen only as carriers of
plant food. These manures also enable a soil to hold
more water and also help to improve the drainage
in clay soils. They provide organic acids that help to
dissolve soil nutrients and make them available for
the plants.

Additionally, organic manures have low nutrient
content and, therefore, need to be applied in large
quantities. For example, to get a standard mixture
of 25 kg NPK, almost 1000-2000 kg organic manure
is required, whereas the same amount of NPK can
be easily obtained with a 50 kg bag of NPK fertilizer.

Compost: Compost is well decomposed organic
wastes like plant residues, animal dung and urine
earth from cattle sheds, waste fodder, etc.

Tips for FYM preparation

e Provide shade to compost site

« Make compost pit in a well drained elevated
place

e Smaller heaps of manageable shape are better

¢ Keep the pit free from weeds

¢ Pit should be near to cattle shed and water
source

¢ Allowing for full maturity

« Also use urine

¢ Ifash is added do not heap in the pit but spread
uniformly

How to use

e Manure should not be kept exposed in the field
before application

¢ Preferably apply in bands into the soil instead
of broadcast. In case broadcast, work it into the
soil immediately

Advantage

« Complete plant nutrient

¢ Improved soil structure increases soil aeration
and drainability

¢ Organic matter acts as biological clay and in-
crease nutrient and water holding capacity of
soil

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

« It reduces the bulk density to desirable level
(1.3g/cc)

« It provides enough food for micro organisms in
the soil and helps to build up microorganisms
in the soil

+ Nutrients slow release nature is very useful for
long duration and plantation crops

Disadvantage

«  Itis bulky

« Cost of handling, transportation and storage
are high

¢ High labour input
« High cost per kg of nutrients

Vermi-Compost: Vermi-composting is a process
by which earthworms convert organic waste into
fertile manure. Important spp of earthworm used
for vermicomposting in Indian conditions are Epi-
geic Eugeniae, Eisenia Foetida, and Perionyx Exca-
vatus.

Earthworms

« Feed on soil and soil organic matter and con-
vert it into compost

+ Encourage growth of useful micro organisms

« Aerate and pulverize the soil

« Make soil porous and improving drainage

« Increasing water holding capacity of soil

« Give strength to plant immunity system

Advantages of vermi-compost

« Easy to use

« Lowcost to produce

* Convert organic matter in to good manure in
short time

How to make it

« Enrich vermi-compost with bio-agents

¢ Earthworms are our friends. Protect them and
nurture in the field

Green manures

¢ Select important species

« Find a season to fit the green manuring crop in
to cropping system

« Incorporate when 45 days old

« Allow 15-20 days before next planting for de-
composition

Example: Sunhemp and Daincha

Green leaf manure
« Grow leguminous trees on road side, on bunds
and waste land

Soil and Plant Nutrition

« Loppings of trees can be incorporated 15 days
before planting

« Provide approximately 5 to 10 tons

Example: Pongamia and Neem

Oilcakes

* Concentrated organic matter

« Mix with chemical fertilizer is useful as they
make fertilizer slow release

« Use to enrich compost/organics

« Use preferably non edible oil cakes

Liquid Fertilisers

« Liquid form of fertilizers are applied with irri-
gation water or for direct application through
foliar spray to augment yield and improve qual-
ity of a variety of crops like fruits, vegetables,
oil seeds, pulses, cereals, cotton, tobacco, sug-
arcane, tea, etc.

¢ It will ease handling, less labour requirement as
well as the possibility of mixing with herbicides
have made the liquid fertilisers more acceptable
to farmers

Fertigation

« Fertigation is the judicious application of ferti-
lizers by combining it with irrigation water

« Fertigation can be achieved through fertilizer
tank, venturi system, injector pump, Non-Elec-
tric Proportional Liquid Dispenser (NEPLD)
and automated system

Advantages of Fertigation

« Ensures a regular flow of water as well as , re-
sulting in increased growth rates for higher
yields

« Offers greater versatility in the timing of the
nutrient application to meet specific crop de-
mands

« Improves availability of nutrients and their up-
take by the roots

« Safer application method which eliminates the
danger of burning the plant root system

« Offers simpler and more convenient applica-
tion than soil application of fertilizer, thus, sav-
ing time, labour, equipment and energy

« Improves fertilizer use efficiency

¢ Reduction of soil compaction and mechanical
damage to the crops

¢ Potential reduction of environmental contami-
nation

* Convenient use of compound and ready-mix

nutrient solutions which also contain a small
concentration of micronutrients
Nutrient content of important organic manures

Nutrient content of important organic manures

Bio-Fertilizers

These are products of microbial origin containing
live cells of micro organisms multiplied in a labo-
ratory and mixed with a carrier material like finely
powdered coal, lignite or humus and supplied in a
solid form.

Basically two types of bio fertilizer distinguished
based on their capacity to supply nitrogen or phos-
phorus. Some bio-fertilizers have the capacity to
supply nitrogen because they have the capacity to
absorb nitrogen gas from the atmosphere in asso-
ciation with plants and use the nutrient for their cell
synthesis. The nitrogen fixed becomes available to
crop plants after the plant material is incorporated
in to soil. This process is known as symbiotic nitro-
gen fixation. Other nitrogen fixing organisms can
live freely in soil and fix nitrogen. There is one more
type where the organism establishes a weak or as-
sociative symbiosis and fixes nitrogen.

In addition to nitrogen fixers there are some bacte-
ria and fungi, which are used as bio-fertilizers to en-
hance phosphorus supply to crops. They solubilize
insoluble or difficulty soluble phosphorus through
their capacity to produce organic acids.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


a) Symbiotic Rhizobium Azolla

Fungi: (Aspergillus Penicillium)
Ecto Mycorrhizal

Endomycorhizae

All bio-fertilizers are microorganisms belonging to
group of bacteria or fungi or blue-green algae.

The capacity of N-Fixers to supply N to crops var-
ies from 10 kg - 100 kg/ha and symbiotic nitrogen
fixers particularly rhizobium bacteria are very effi-
cient. The P-Solubilizers and P-Absorbers can mo-
bilize insoluble phosphorus to the extent of 10 Kg
to 50 kg P/ha. Mycorrihizae are symbiotic fungi,
which get associated with plant roots. Azolla is a
water fern which establishes a very active and ben-
eficial association with blue-green algae - Anabaena

b) Associative Symbiosis Azospirillum
c) Non Symbiotic Azotobacter Blue- green Algae

Bacteria: (Bacillus, Pseudomonas)

All leguminous crops; Rice
All cereal crops; Sugar cane

All crops; Rice

All Crops

All Crops
Tree crops

All Crops

Algal inoculants are cultivated on submerged soils
in tanks, dried and supplied as soil based culture
(Inoculants). Endomycorrhizal inoculants are sup-
plied as pieces of roots of grass plants infected with
mycorrhizae. Ectomycorrihizal inoculants are culti-
vated in the laboratory and mixed with carrier ma-
terial for supply. Azolla are supplied as fresh fronds
(leaf). The bio-fertilizers are inoculated to seeds or
applied directly to soil after suspending them in wa-
ter. Azolla is applied directly to soil, which on mul-
tiplication establishes a very active symbiotic asso-
ciation with Anabaena, a blue-green alga.

¢ The best nutrient management method is Integrated Nutrient Management.
e Use bulk quantity of organic matter to provide good physical and chemical prop-

erties to soil.

e Smaller quantities of chemical fertilizer to provide quick release, which matches

the uptake pattern of crops.

Soil and Plant Nutrition

I. Package of Practices - Banana

anana is one of the most commonly grown fruit crop of the country. India produces about

26.217 MT of banana from an area of 0.709 Mha with an average productivity of 37.0 mt/ha.
Major producing states are Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, As-
sam and Madhya Pradesh. Tamil Nadu has 0.1244 mha under banana and the total production
during 2008-09 is 6.667 Mmt with 53.6 mt/ha productivity. In Gujarat, banana crop is cultivated
in 11 districts covering an area of about 60900 ha. Gujarat is ranking 3rd among the states of India
with an average productivity of 58.7t/ha. Unripe fruits are used for making chips, vegetable flour,
etc. Ripened fruits are used for preparing drink, jam, beer, salad, etc. Banana fruits are having
numerous medicinal uses (as per Ayurveda). From psedostem threads are obtained and used for
making rope and cloths.

Prevailing Varieties: Basarai, Lokhandi, Robasta, Shreemanti and Grand Naine.

Climate: Banana grows well in warm and humid climate with an average temperature of 270C
and rainfall of 2,000 to 2,500 mm. However, it requires assured irrigation facility.

Soil type suitability: Loamy and salty clay loam soils with good fertility status are best suited
for banana cultivation. However, extremely clayey and sandy soils are not suitable for banana crop.

Land preparation: The land should be ploughed, harrowed and planked to achieve levelled
fields. For planting banana, dugout a pit of 30 x 30 x 30 cm size at a spacing of 1.5 x 1.5 m.

Soil sterilization: After land preparation, the pits should be exposed to the sunlight for 10 to
15 days. In the case of heavy infestation of soil born pest and diseases, the soil solarization should
be done using transparent plastic for a period of 15 to 20 days during summer season (preferably
during May).

Time of plating: Optimum time for planting is 15th June to 15th July. Banana planting is done
either by suckers or tissue culture plant.

Suckers: Suckers should be selected from a healthy field of banana. Sufficient care should be
taken that suckers should not be damaged during digging and transport. Fresh sucker, weighing
about 500 to 1,500 g, should be selected. For control of fungal diseases, suckers should be dipped
in a solution of aurofugine’ (10 g/ 100 litres of water) for 1.5 hour prior to planting.

Tissue culture plant: Select healthy and uniform plants.

Irrigation and scheduling: The water requirement of banana crop by surface method of ir-
rigation (25-30 irrigations) is 1,500-1,800 mm. By drip irrigation method, water requirement is
900-1,080 mm. The drip system should be operated on alternate day for a period of 1.05 to 2.25
hours during winter and 2.5 to 2.75 hrs during summer at a pressure of 1.2 kg/cm2.

! Aurofugine- To be used with caution.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Details of Drip System

15m
2

30 cm away on either side of stem

4.0 Iph

Water requirement for banana under drip irrigation

1-3 5
3-5 9
5-8 11
8-11 10

Application of Fertilizers

Basal

FYM should be applied @ 20 to 25 t/ha at the time of land preparation. Top dressing of fertilizer
should be done as given below

For using water-soluble fertilizers, the following schedule of fertigation may be followed:

N (180g/plant) 7 to 8 splits at an interval of 15 to 20
days.

P (72g/plant) 7 to 8 splits at an interval of 15 to 20
days.

K (180¢/plant) 7 to 8 splits at an interval of 15 to 20
days.

Time of application: The total quantities of water-soluble fertilizers should be applied in 7 to 8
splits at an interval of 15 to 20 days. The first split should be applied at the time of planting before
monsoon and the rest should be applied after the cessation of monsoon.

Weeding: Banana fields should be kept weed free either by hand weeding/interculturing or by
weedicide (diuron @ 1.2 kg/ha as pre emergence) application. Mulching with black plastic (50 mi-
cron) or sugarcane trash (@ 10 t/ha) should be done. If required, hand weeding should be done prior
to mulching.

Desuckering: First desuckering should be done manually. To minimize the regeneration of suck-
ers, 3 ml of diesel or kerosene should be injected into the cut portion of the suckers.


Soil and Plant Nutrition

Plant protection measures

Bunchy top Aphid should be controlled by applying systemic insecticide
viz; Acetamiprid: (0.2gm/litre).

Premature fruit ripening Sucker should be dipped in the solution of Aurofugin' 10 g in
100 litres of water for 1.5 hrs.

Rhizome weevil and nematode Neem based products such as Neem oil, Neem cake, Neem
seed Kernal extract (NSKE) can be applied.

Bunch coverage: After the complete formation of the bunch, it should be covered by LLDP film
bag (blue, white or black colour). This improves quality as well as yield of banana.

Time of harvesting: Maturity varies with variety but usually the crop takes about 12-14 months
to mature.

Yield: By adopting the above practices, the banana yields about 70 to 80 t/ha. Generally, size and
colour based grading is done.

Post harvest handling and storage: Bananas can be stored for up to a week in a cool place
but unripe bananas should not be stored in the refrigerator as this may irreversibly interrupt the
ripening process. If the banana is no longer green, then it is ripe and can be stored for a maximum of
one week. For storage, banana should be stored at 130 to 140C. Bunches should be kept out of light
after harvest since this hastens ripening and softening. For export, hands are cut into units of 4-16
fingers, graded for both length and girths and carefully placed in poly-lined boxes to hold 12 to 18
kg depending on export requirement. Prior to packaging fruits are cleaned in water or dilute sodium
hypochlorite solution to remove the latex and treated with thiobendazole.

Plastic packaging: Keeping quality of banana can be increased when packed in 400 gauge LDPE
(Low-Density Poly Ethylene) bags with or without ventilation either under ambient temperature or
in a zero energy cool chamber (13.5°C). Storing of banana fruits in unvented polybags at low tem-
perature could extend the shelf life of the fruits up to 19.33 days.

Cost economics
17,500

1, 08,000

1, 25,500

2, 10,000 to 2, 40,000
84,500 to 1, 14,500
1:1.67

1Aurofugin- To be used with caution.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Soil and Plant Nutrition

II. Packages of Practices - MANGO

ango is the most important fruit crop of India. India produces about 12.750 Mt of Mango

from an area of 2.309 Mha with an average productivity of 5.5 mt/ha. Major producing
states are Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Orissa &
Maharashtra. Uttar Pradesh has 0.2712 mha under mango and the total production during 2008-
09 is 3.465 Mt with 12.8 mt/ha productivity. India ranks first in the world for mango production
and area under cultivation. Mango is a rich source of vitamin A and has a fairly good content of
vitamin C. Mango fruits are used for preparation of pickle, chatani, amchur, jam, squash, nectar
and many other delicious products.

Climate and soil: Mango can be grown from alluvial to lateritic soils except black cotton soil
which has poor drainage. The temperature between 24 and 270C is ideal for mango cultivation.

Variety: Dashehari, Langra, Chausa, Bombay Green, Lucknow Safeda, Mallika and Amrapali.

Multiplication of genuine planting material: Mango can be propagated by veneer, wedge
and soft wood grafting. The protected nurseries in polyhouses and use of sprinkler and drip is
becoming common for raising humidity level, which is required for higher grafting success rate.

Preparation of land: The land should be prepared one month before planting. The pits of 1m x
1m x Im size are dug. The pits are exposed for 2 to 4 weeks to kill harmful soil organisms.

Soil sterilization: Soil sterilization can be achieved through both physical and chemical means.
Physical control measures include steam and solar energy. Chemical control methods include her-
bicides and fumigants. Soil sterilization can also be achieved by using transparent plastic mulch
film (25 micron thickness) termed as soil solarisation.

Planting: Square and rectangular systems are popular. Before planting, pits are filled with FYM
at the rate of 15-20 kg/plant. The grafts should be planted during July to September.

Planting density: High density (3m x 6m or 5m x 5m) planting helps increase the yield/unit
area. Normal planting distance of mango is 8m x 8m.

Canopy Management: Training should be done after 6th month of planting. It is essential to
space the branches properly and to help in intercultural operation. At initial branching height be-
tween 60 to 70 cm is appropriate.

Water requirement of the crop

Young plant (up to 3 years) 9-12 Its

3-6 years 30-35 Its
6-10 years 50-60 Its
9-12 years 80-90 Its
Fully grown trees 120 Its

A young tree requires 2 drippers at a distance of 1m on lateral lines, while fully-grown tees require
2 drippers with double lateral lines at 1-1.5 m distance.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Application of fertilizers: Mango should be manured with phosphorus twice in a year ie. the
beginning of the monsoon (June-July) and during the period of post-monsoon (September-Octo-
ber). Usually fertilizers (N and K) are applied in split doses in the month of June-July, September-
October, January-February and March-April. For adult trees (10 years or above) 1,000g N, 75g
P205, 75g K20 and 100 kg FYM per year should be applied. Application of micronutrients such
as Zinc and Boron help in cell elongation process.

Malformation: Deblossoming at bud stage (1 cm long) alone or in combination with spray of
200 ppm NAA lowers the number of malformed panicle.

Alternate bearing management: Use of paclobutrazol (5-10g/m canopy diameter), 3 months
before budburst applied through soil drenching can be used for obtaining regular bearing.

Weed management: Black plastic mulch (100 micron) restricts the germination of weed seeds
and suppresses the weed growth. The size of the film requirement for young plant is 1 m x 1 m, and
for 8 years onwards film requirement is 2.5 m x 2.5 m around the tree.

Intercropping: In the interspaces of mango orchard, certain vegetable can be intercropped viz.
onion, tomato, radish, carrot, ginger, turmeric, methi, cabbage, etc. Moreover, fruit crops can also
be grown viz. papaya, pineapple, etc. for the initial 4-5 years.

Mulching: Soil drenching with paclobutrazol (5g and 10g/tree) coupled with black polythene
mulch (100 micron) results into minimum outbreak of September to October vegetative flushing,
giving an early and profuse flowering and a higher annual yield.

Plant Protection Measures

Pest starts attacking during Spraying of acetamiprid or thiamethoxam
flowering season. (0.2gm/litre of water).

Nymphs suck juice from young Raking of soil around the trunk and mixing
shoots, panicles and flower with neem cake around tree trunk is effective.
pedicels.

Pest makes tunnel through the Clearing tunnels with hard wire, pouring,
main trunk and branches. Emamectin benzoate (50 gm / litre) and
plugged with mud.

Pest makes the fruits rot by Application of acetamiprid or thiamethoxam
laying its eggs in clusters, just (0.2gm/litre of water).

before the ripening, under the

peel of fruits.


It attacks leaves, flowering Spraying of Copper Oxychloride (0.03%)can
panicles and fruits. control this disease.

Whitish powdery growth on — Wettable sulphur (0.02%) and Bayleton

the leaves. (0.05%).

Unattractive fruits because Streptocycline(100-200ppm), agrimycin
affected parts of fruits show (17% streptomycin) -100 (100ppm) and cop-
longitudinal crack and oozing __ per oxychloride’ (0.03%).

of bacterial exudate and lead-

ing to fruit drop.

Yield and quality control:
From a well grown up tree one can expect an average yield of 50-225 marketable fruits (50 kg) per
plant per year.

Harvesting and post harvest management:

From the 4th year onwards the mango fruits can be harvested at the mature green stage during
morning hours. After harvesting fruits are graded according to their size, weight, colour and ma-
turity. Packaging of fruits should be done in corrugated fibreboard (CFB) boxes. Tissue paper and
polythene foam paper are used for wrapping high-value fresh mangoes. Polyethylene lining has
been found beneficial as it maintains humidity, which results in lesser shrinkage during storage.
Dashahari treated with calcium chloride solution (4%) at sub-atmospheric pressure of 500 mm Hg
for 5 minutes can be stored at 12 oC for 27 days.

Cost economics of drip irrigated mango (one ha)
10.5%

7.5 years
19 t/ha
5m x 5m
Rs.24, 000
Rs.30, 298
Rs.8,713
1: 6.0


Soil and Plant Nutrition

III. Package of Practices - Sugarcane
Time Schedule Recommended Operations

Before planting Plough the land up to 45 cm depth.

Apply 25 tons per hectare of well-decomposed Farm Yard Manure
(FYM) or decomposed molasses or compost and deep plough the field
with tractor.

Make ridges and furrows with 80 cm spacing having 20 cm height and
up to 10 m length.

Apply 375 kg super phosphate in the furrows.

Planting day Select about 75,000 two-budded setts per hectare from 6-8 months old
nursery or raise seedlings in poly bags with single-budded setts.

Treat the setts for 10 minutes by dipping in a solution prepared with
Thiamine, 2.5 kg urea and 2.5 kg lime in 250 litres of water.

Plant the setts 2 cm deep with buds on the sides.

For every 10 furrows, plant setts on 2 rows in one furrow for gap filing
purpose.

3rd day after planting To control weeds, spray atrataf @ 2.5 kg/ha in 500 litres of water with
hand sprayer.

5th day after planting © Spread sugarcane trash up to a height of 15 cm on the ridge.

25th day after planting | Gap-fill with seedlings raised in polybags or the plants taken from the
2 rows planted- furrows in every 10th furrow.

30th day after planting Mix 5 kg Azospirillum and 5 kg phosphobacterium per ha mixed with
250 kg powdered FYM. Apply at the bottom of the plants and irrigate
immediately.

From 35th day after From 35 to 100 days after planting Irrigate once in 7-10 days.

lantin:
eons To prevent attack by early shoot borer, apply Sulphur on the setts and

cover with soil.

If 25-30% of the shoots are affected, then for every 100 metre length
of furrow, mix Sulphur and apply using a hand sprayer on the tips and
bottom of the shoots.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Soil and Plant Nutrition

45th day after planting Do hand weeding.

Apply in pits a mixture of 110 kg nitrogen’, 60 kg of potash and 35 kg
of neem cake per hectare.

60th, 90th and 120th Spray a mixture of urea 2.5%, potassium chloride 2.5% during periods
days after planting of drought.

On the 60th day, apply a mixture of 5kg azospirillum, 5kg phospho-
bacterium and 250 kg of decomposed FYM in powder form at the bot-
tom of the plants and irrigate immediately.

On the 90th day, do hand weeding; apply in pits (after earthing up) a
mixture of 110 kg of nitrogen’, 60 kg of potassium and 35 kg of neem
cake per hectare.

120th day after planting Under drought conditions, apply 60 kg of potassium and irrigate im-
mediately.

150 days to 225 days Carry out de-trashing at 150 days after planting.

after planting
P If inter-node borer exists, release parasites 6 times @ 5 cc per hectare

once in 15 days.

101-210 days - irrigate once in 7 days.

210th day- detrash and tie lodged canes.

225th day- spray acetamiprid or thiamethoxam (2mlI/litre of water) to
control mealy bugs, white fly and scales.

260th day Spray Emamectin benzoate (50 gm / litre) of water under the leaves (if
required) to control pyrilla and all sucking pests.
270 to 360 days Irrigate once in 15 days.

Stop irrigation 15 days before harvesting.

Cut canes at the bottom close to the ground with sickles or sharp knife.
Remove trash, roots, water shoots and cane tops and send clean canes
to the factory.

'Nitrogen- To be used with caution and preventive measures (Gloves, etc).

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Soil and Plant Nutrition

SCHEDULE OF OPERATIONS: RATOON CROP

Time Schedule Recommended Operations
Remove trash, stubble shave uniformly under correct moisture condi-
tions with sharp spades.

Mix 15 tons of FYM or 25 tons of compost or 25 tons of decayed mo-
lasses with 375 kg Superphosphate (75 kg of P205), 135 kg of nitrogen
and 35 kg of neem cake per hectare in pits.

Irrigate immediately, cutting the sides of the ridges and ensuring mix-
ing of applied manures well with the soil.

Control weeds by spraying atrataf @2.5 kg in 500 litres of water with
hand spray.

9th -10th day Mix 5kg azospirillum and 5 kg phosphobacteria per hectare with 250
kg of powdered FYM and apply at the bottom of the plants and irrigate
immediately.

Spread trash obtained from plant canes on the furrows.

25th - 30th day Gap-fill with grown up plants.

To prevent attack by early shoot borer, apply Sulphur on the setts and
cover with soil.

35th day Mix 5kg azospirillum per hectare with 250 kg of powdered FYM and
apply at the bottom of the plants and irrigate immediately.

From 1-35 days Irrigate once in 7 days.
From 35-90 days Irrigate once in 10 days.
60th day Do hand weeding.

Apply in pits a mixture of 110 kg nitrogen, 60 kg of potash and 35 kg
of neem cake per hectare and follow light earthing-up.

90th day Apply 60 kg of potash additionally in drought situations.

91- 250 days Irrigate once in 7 days.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Soil and Plant Nutrition

30, 60 and 90 days

120th day

121 to 210 days

180 days:

210 days

251-360 days

Harvest

Spray a mixture of urea 2.5%, and potassium chloride 2.5%on the
leaves in drought situations.

Detrash and earth up well.

Release Trichogramma parasites (when required) once in 15 days.

Detrash a second time.

Spray acetamiprid or thiamethoxam (0.2gm/litre of water) to control
mealy bugs, white fly and scale insects.

Irrigate once in 15 days and stop irrigation 15 days before harvest.

Cut canes at the bottom close to the ground with sickles or sharp knife.
Remove trash, roots, water shoots and cane tops and send clean canes
to the factory.

Note: Water Management - Irrigation gap has to be adjusted depending up on quantity of rain

fall Reduce gap between irrigation in sandy soils and increase it in block soils.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Soil and Plant Nutrition

IV. Package of Practice for Nagpur Mandarin
Cultivation

Selection of site

Ou Soil should be well drained and of shallow or medium depth. Deep heavy soils hav-

ing more than 60% clay contents are not suitable for citrus plantation. Nursery: Nursery
should be located at least 500 meters away preferably on western side of the orchard to minimize
incidence of insect pests and diseases.

Raising of citrus nursery

Sowing of Rootstock Seeds

Potting mixture of soil, sand and FYM or compost should be used in equal proportion (1:1:1) for
filling of trays in primary nursery and polythene bags in secondary nursery. Before it is used for
filling the bags/trays, the potting mixture should be solarised. For solarisation, it is spread on the
concrete platform in 4” thick layer in the month of April - May, sufficiently moistened with water,
then covered fully with the white polythene sheet, sealing its edges with soil. Then it should be left
undisturbed for 11/2 to 2 months in the hot sun for solarisation.

Only certified seeds of rough lemon or Rangpur lime rootstocks should be used.
Shade dried medium size bold seeds of rootstocks should be treated with vitavax or thiram
(@ 3g/kg seed) and sown on the raised beds or in plastic trays during September - October.
Stagnation of water in beds should be avoided otherwise roots of young plants may start root-
ing.
Uniform seedlings of medium height only be selected discarding either vigorous or the weak
and dwarf ones while transferring to secondary nursery. Plants having hooked or bent roots
should be discarded.

¢ Disease free budgrafts of nagpur mandarin

Plant Protection Measures

¢ Phytophthora infected plants must be eliminated. In case of phytophthora infection drenching
of plants with either metalaxyl MZ72 @ 2.75 g/l water or fosetyl Al @ 2.5 g/l water should be
done. Second spray should be given after 40 days.
To prevent infestation of insect pests like citrus leaf miner and thrips plants should be sprayed
either with acetamiprid or thiamethoxam (0.2gm/litre of water) at 10 days intervals.
The growth of plants is also affected adversely due to mite attack which can be controlled by
spraying plans with Fenazaquin 10% EC @ 4ml/litre and wettable sulfur @ 3 g/l water, alter-
natively at 15-20 days interval.
In containerized nursery irrigation, fertilizer application, weed control, insect pest and disease
control as well as cultural operations can be performed at ease.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Budding

« Budsticks should be used from the author-
ized and certified source only.

« Budstick should be drawn from the last
years flush. The stick should have pencil
thickness, be roundish and have whitish
longitudinal streaks.

¢ Budstick should not be drawn from rub-
bery wood or kikarpani plants.

« Budding should be performed at 10” - 12”
height on the rootstock seedling.

o ‘
wet reg Tis, ae

Disease Free Bud Grafts of Nagpur Mandarin

Orchard Establishment

Pits size
¢ Pits for planting should be 2’6” x 2’6” x 2’6” (75 x 75 x 75 cm) size and spaced at 6 x 6 m dis-
tance.

¢ To avoid soil borne fungi or nematodes soil of roots should be removed.

Pre-planting treatment for budlings
¢ Roots of budling should be dipped in the solution of metalaxyl1MZ72 2.75 g for 10-15 min-
utes before planting.

Planting of budlings
« While planting care should be taken that rootstock union remains at least 6” above ground.

Manure and fertilizer application

« Nitrogen containing fertilizers should be applied in three equal splits in January, July and No-
vember months; phosphorus containing fertilizers in two splits in January and July months
and Potassium containing fertilizers may be applied as singly dose in January.

« Surveys conducted by NRCC in Kalmeshwar, Katol, Narkhed, Saoner, Hingna and Ramtek
tehsils of Nagpur district have revealed N deficiency in most of the orchards and P deficiency
in leaf and soil of 50% orchards. Similarly, leaf and soil K was either at desired levels or even
more than it. Citrus trees are nitrogen loving plants. They respond well to the applied ni-
trogenous fertilizers. During fruit development K may also be applied as it may fell deficient.
Supplementary doses of P and K at 200 and 100 g/tree, respectively, may be included in the
fertilizer package recommended for bearing orchard.

Fertilizer doses

Fertilizers /Age of 1 Year II Year Ill Year IV Year and
tree Above

As far as possible 1/3rd of the dose of N may be given through farm yard manure/compost, oil cakes
etc.


Leaf sampling

For correct diagnosis of nutritional status use of correct sampling technique is very important.
For this, it is important to know as to how many leaves, when, from which part of the plant and
from how many trees should be sampled. In case of ambia bahar, 5-6 month old leaves in August-
October and for mrig bahar 6-8 months old leaves in December and February should be sampled.
As far as possible, the 2nd, 3rd of 4th leaf should be picked from the tip of the non-bearing shoot,
preferably at 1.5 - 2 m above the ground and sampled.

Drip irrigation

With the help of a drip system of irrigation, the required quantity of water can be provided right
at the feeder root system. Similarly, water-soluble fertilizers and micronutrients also can be given
through the drip system. Water requirement of irrigation depends upon age of the tree and season
of the year (Table 1). Mulching with drip irrigation maintains moisture in soil for a longer period.

Water requirement of the nagpur mandarin (litres / day / tree)

Age of the three (years)

53) 78 109 127 145 163 181
63 87 123 143 163 183 204
74 102 143 166 188 211 235

48 67 95 110 126 142 157

8 18 26 41 56 79 92 105 4118 131
7 14 23 34.04. 60 70 80 90 100
8 1525 36 45 5 7H —:—“‘«CTsCi‘“(<‘é‘«‘i_;SC*«d;S
9 17 27 40 52 79 92 105 118 131
8 1525 36 45 387485 (OHCS—Ss«Cd'SKO

December 6 11 19 24 35 49 57 65 73 82
Weed control

For effective and economic control of mono and dicotyledonous weeds, pre-emergence weedi-
cides, diuron 3 kg at the end of May and 120 days thereafter should be done. For post-emergence
weed control, glyphosate @ 4 I/ha should be sprayed on weeds before flowering.

Fruit drop

Fruit drop in citrus is of serious nature which occurs at least twice; i-e. the first time when the fruits
are little more than the marble size and the second time when the fruits are fully developed or at
the time of colour break. This drop is very serious in the ambia bahar crop pre-harvest fruit drop in


Soil and Plant Nutrition

nagpur mandarin, which is called as pre-harvest fruit drop and is important from economic point
of view to the orchardists. To control the fruit drop that occurs after fruit set, two foliar sprays of
either 2,4-D or GA3 at 15 ppm + urea 1% and copper oxychloride? (0.3%) at monthly intervals in
April - May are recommended. Same spray concentration is recommended for controlling pre-
harvest drop in the months of September and October. 2,4-D and GA3 may be dissolved earlier in
little quantity (30 - 40 ml for 1g) of some organic solvent such as alcohol or acetone before making
the spray solution.

Control of Insect Pests

Blackfly (Kolshi): Nymphs of citrus blackfly attack the young flush, suck the sap and excrete
sweet and sticky liquid, which favours rapid development of black sooty mould that covers entire
plant surface. The process of photosynthesis is hampered greatly resulting in stunted growth of
plants, low intensity of flowering, scarce fruiting which are insipid in taste and decline of citrus
orchard sets. For control of blackfly two sprays of insecticides viz. acetamiprid 0.2 g/litre water
should be given at 50% egg hatching stage that normally occurs in the II weed of July and the I
week of December and April. One additional spray which targets the adult blackfly population
when it is as its peak helps tremendously in controlling the pest.

Method of spraying: Spraying should be directed at the underside of the leaf, ensuring the
complete drenching of the tree. For proper coverage and penetration of canopy, use of power
sprayers for spraying operation should be envisaged. Insecticides should be used alternatively for
better results.

Citrus psylla: Numerous young brownish nymphs of psylla are seen crawling on the young
flush. Several dirty gray colour adults can be seen sitting in line with tails upwards. Voluminous
desapping by the nymphs results into the drop of flush, flowers and berries. Affected branches
dry and die-back sets in. The nymphs also excrete white crystalline powder, which invites fungal
infestation. Psylla can be controlled by spraying acetamiprid 0.2 g/litre water twice with 10 days
interval during the initial days of flushing. Bark eating caterpillar (Larva) are incidence of mites
on fruits (Lalya).

Leaf miner: Serpentine mines are seen on the new leaves and also young stems are mined when
the incidence is severe. At times death of young shoots may occur. The problem is quite serious in
nursery and in young orchard. To control citrus leaf miners, spray either imidacloprid 5 ml (To be
used in proper doses under guidance of an agriculture expert) and thiamethoxam 0.2g/litre water.

Bark eating caterpillar: The pest is noticed predominantly in the older and ignored orchards.
The hanging wooden frass and tunnel at the joint of two branches during October - April indicates
the presence of the pest. Larva remains hidden inside the tunnel during daytime and becomes
active in the night and feeds on the bark nearby the tunnel. This results into snapping of food sup-
ply, ultimately yellowing of leaves on the branch and its slow decline. For control of the pest the
wooden frass should be cleaned and each tunnel should be administered with Emamectin benzo-
ate/spinosad @0.4 ml/litre water.

Fruit sucking moth: The moth attacks the ripening fruits during late hours in the evening. The
moth punctures it making a hole in the ripening fruit to suck the juice through which an infection
may take place. Soon rottening starts, leading to fruit drop. Collection of dropped fruits and their

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Soil and Plant Nutrition

destruction followed by smoking of orchard late evening hours is suggested. For fruit fly control,
hanging of methl eugenol (feromone) traps is an effective method to check the pest.

Mites: Citrus rust mites attack in mrig bahar fruits especially during September — November.
The fruit surface, particularly the side exposed to sun, is brushed and develops a big patch of dark
brown colour - called ‘Lalya - only after 1 to 11/2 months. To check this, two alternating prophy-
lactic sprays at 15-20 days interval with Fenazaquin 10% EC @ 4ml/litre and wettable sulphur @ 3
g/l water are recommended in September - October. Similarly, a phytophthora caused gummosis
spray of acetamiprid/thiamethoxam @0.2g/litre water at the berry stage of the ambai fruits is re-
quired to protect the fruits from unpleasant scars.

Precautionary measures: Avoid water stagnation in orchard by providing channels along
the slope for proper drainage. Moreover, pruning of intermingling branches to allow aeration
and sunlight to prevent dampness in orchard are suggested. Presence of guava, pomegranate, chi-
ku, mango trees, etc. near the orchard act as the alternate hosts for blackfly, therefore, such trees
should also be covered with insecticidal sprays.

Control of Diseases

Twig Blight: Drying of fruit bearing branches after harvest is a common phenomenon. Removal
of such dried shoots along with the 2 cm lower live part, followed by a fungicidal spray i.e. copper
oxychloride or bordeaux paste application is recommended to check twig blight.

Gummosis, root rot and collar rot

¢ Proper diagnosis of the disease is must.

« Affected trees should be treated with metalaxyl MZ 72 @ 2.75 g or fosetyl AL @ 2.5 g/l water
till drenching once in May - June. The second spray should be given after 40 days. The tree
trunk and soil of the tree basin should also be sprayed/drenched.

« Removal of the rotten roots, cleaning the wound on the gum-oozing trunk with sharp knife
and then pasting with metalaxyl’ MZ 72 should be done.

« Apply bordeaux paste (1 kg CuSO4 + 1 kg CaOH + 101 water) on tree trunk upto 2 to 21/2 ft
from ground twice i.e. before monsoon (May) and after monsoon (October).

Precautionary measures

« Avoid flood irrigation

« Follow the double ring system of irrigation so that water does not come in contact with
the tree trunk.

« Avoid deep ploughing under the tree to prevent damage/injury of the root system. Declin-
ing nagpur mandarin orchard rejuvenated orchard.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Soil and Plant Nutrition

Pre-harvest spray of fungicide: Three pre-harvest sprays of fungicides like difenocon-
azole @2ml/litre water at 15 day intervals till drenching prevent pre-harvest fruit drop by 54%. It
also controls post harvest diseases upto 70%. This spray remains effective for 3 weeks at normal
temperatures.

Post-harvest fungicidal treatment: Fruits dipped in fungicidal solution difenoconazole for
5 minutes are safe to minimize rotting upto 70% and can safely be stored for 3 weeks under normal
condition.

Precautionary measures

¢ Follow plant protection measures to keep bearing tree disease free and healthy.

¢ Post-harvest handling of fruits must be followed carefully to avoid any sort of injury of
fruits.
Avoid the use of copper fungicides like b,ordeaux mixture, blitox, phytolan etc. at this
stage.

Rejuvenation of declining citrus orchards: Declining citrus orchards can be rejuvenated
with the use of developed technologies and brought into productive stage.

Harvesting

¢ Traditionally fruits are harvested by twisting and pulling forcefully which may lead to a hole in
the neck of the fruit or injury to the stem end. The fruits should be selectively harvested when
%th of the skin turns yellow. TSS: Acidity ratio should not be less than 14 in both ambia and
mrig bahar fruits. TSS should be at least 10%. Once this stage is reached, harvesting should
not be delayed for colour development since other fruits may turn loose.
Fruit should not be allowed to come in contact with soil and straw and also should not be
exposed to hot sun.
Packing should be done immediately after harvesting.
For waxing on a large scale packing line can be used. Washing and waxing (stay fresh high
shine was 2.5 g + Tebuconazole) and grading of fruits is also done automatically at the end.
Graded fruits are packed in corrugated fibre board boxes (50 x 30 x 30 cm) which are telescop-
ic with holes on both the sides covering 5% of total side portion. To keep the fruits safe from
moisture in the store house, boxes should be externally laminated with plastic.
For small scale (1 - 1.5 tonne) and short duration (20 - 25 days) storage an evaporative cool
chamber is recommended, costing Rs.10,000/- to 12,000/-.
For delaying or postponing the harvest of the fruits, two sprays of GA3 (100 mg / 10 litre of
water) in 15 day intervals at the point of the colour break are recommended.
For long duration cold storage, a temperature of 6-7 0 C and humidity 90-95% is desirable.
In such a situation, citrus fruits should not be stored for more than 45 days. To avoid chilling
injury, care should be taken that the temperature does not go down upto 40 C.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Soil and Plant Nutrition

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture



3. Plant Protection

3.1. Objectives of the session

e To increase the awareness and understanding about the crop pest, diseases and weeds.
¢ To strengthen the farmer’s knowledge on effective management of insects, diseases and weeds in crops

through Integrated Pest Management.

e To sensitise farmers on safe handling of chemicals.

3.2. What we know at the end of the session

¢ Insects and their life cycles

¢ Methods of insect control including Integrated Pest Management (IPM)

¢ Plant protection equipments

« Symptoms of major diseases

¢ Integrated disease management
¢ Major weeds

« Methods of controlling weeds

¢ Safe handling of chemicals

I. Pest Management

Pp“ is any organism which is detrimental to crop
production. Pest cause damage to the plant to
the extent of 30 - 90 per cent, sometimes it even
causes total loss. Pest includes insects, diseases and
weeds. Non insect pest includes nematodes, snails
and rodents.

Insect is any of many small invertebrate animals
having a segmented body and three pairs of legs and
usually two pairs of wings. Some insects are benefi-
cial and some are harmful to agriculture.

What is the difference between
complete and incomplete metamor-
phosis in insects?

Incomplete and complete metamorphosis differs
in the number of life cycle stages that insects go
through during their transformation from egg to
adult. The complete metamorphosis has 4 life cycle
stages and an incomplete metamorphosis has 3 life
cycle stages.

Complete metamorphosis
Complete metamorphosis has four distinct life cy-
cle stages: egg, larva, pupa and adult.

Examples of insects that go through complete
metamorphosis are butterflies, silkworms, meal-
worms and ladybugs. The larva can be worm-like
even though the six legs are still visible. The larva
form moths and butterflies are called caterpillars.
Maggots are the larval stage of flies. The larvae eat
constantly and grow rapidly. A hard, protective case
forms around the larva at pupa stage. The pupa
stage for a butterfly is called a chrysalis. The pupa
stage for moth is called cocoon.

Incomplete metamorphosis

Incomplete metamorphosis has three life cycle stag-
es: egg, nymph and adult. The nymph looks similar
too but is a smaller version of the adult. The nymph
is also wingless. Examples are grasshoppers, cock-
roaches, ants and praying mantids.

¢ EGGis the initial stages of the insect. Normally
an insect lays at least 30 to 300.
¢ Egg hatch into LARVA or worms. Larva is the


damaging stage of insect to any crop. This stage
is normally seen in the field.

Eggs (10-15 IInstar I Instar Ill Instar

days) July to Larva

October (14-18
months)

Biology of Arecanut
root grubs
2 year life cycle

—

Adult (30-45 days) Pupa (25-30 day)
Between June to September February to March

erent

Semilooper feeding on caster

How the damage is visible?

The larva eats the leaf, fruits or the whole plant

parts. Hence the damage is visible.

« Some insects scrape the plant tissues. They also
cut the growing parts. Beetles, bugs, thrips and

¢ PUPA is an inactive stage preparing itself to de- hoppers usually suck the sap from the plants
velop to an adult. and growing parts, affecting the healthy plant.

¢ Mostly ADULTS insects are harmless but many
bugs and beetles are harmful to plants.

Life stages of insects

Grub of green lace wing

Mite damage in coconut buttons

Ladybird beetle

« Not at all. HONEY BEES are also insects which
help in pollination (brings pollen from one
plant to another), thereby, increasing the yield.

Larva damaging leaves


Plant Protection

They also provide us valuable HONEY and
other products. Another example of “friendly”
insects are SILK WORMS.

« NATURAL ENEMIES are insects that are ben-
eficial to man since they feed from the egg or
larvae and pupae of crop pest. They are called
biological control agents. Examples are the
trichogramma parasite for sugarcane borers,
crub of green lacewing and ladybird beetle.

3.5. Insect classification

| bare can be classified into 3 groups, depending
on their behaviour in the farm such as

e Pests
¢ Beneficial insects
¢ Neutral insects

Pest: Whether an insect species is a pest or not
depends on the situation. This means that a cer-
tain insect could be a pest in one situation but not
in another situation. For example, the caterpillars
of diamondback moth feed on cabbage and other
plants of the cruciferae family. A farmer who grows
cauliflower will therefore consider it a pest. Yet, for
a farmer who grows potatoes or bananas, the dia-
mondback moth is a neutral insect. When there is
nothing to feed it will not even occur. In a paddy
crop, black gram is a weed/pest since it is growing
unnecessarily. In a black gram field, cow pea is a
weed since it can grow. Pest will occur only if there
is a host.

Beneficial insects

Some insects are beneficial to the farmer, because
they are the natural enemies of harmful insects.
Predators feed on other insects and hence control
the pest. For example, the assassin bug kills caterpil-
lars and ladybird beetles feed on aphids. Some oth-
er insects are beneficial as they help in pollination
of plants, e.g. honey bees. There are commercially
beneficial insects such as silkworm, which produces
silk.

Neutral insects

A neutral insect is neither a pest nor beneficial. Yet
again, it really depends on the context. A mosquito
in the rice field can be considered as neutral insect.

3.6. How to control pest
Natural control

Understanding insect life cycle: Insects mul-
tiply in large numbers. However the survival rate
is very less as the nature maintains insect popula-
tion. Factors like extreme temperature, heavy rains,
heavy wind, water stagnation, birds, lizards, spiders,
animals, other insects and diseases control the pest.
Natural barriers like sea, river, lake, mountains, etc.
prevent movement and spread of pest.

Mechanical control: Some of the recommended

practices are

e Removal of affected parts

¢ Collection and destruction of insects

¢ Drying of seeds

¢ Tar coating of trees to protect from termites

¢ Provision of barriers to prevent the entry of
pests like green house / screen house, covering
of pomegranate fruits with butter paper, etc.

¢ Clipping off the withered shoots

Agronomical methods: Recommended culti-

vation practices are as follows.

¢ Summer ploughing: Opens up the soil and ex-
poses pest to hot sun and predators.

¢ Trap crop: Is growing the most favoured crop of
the insect along with the main crop. The insect
feeds from the trap crop and the main crop re-
mains not unaffected. Growing of resistant va-
rieties also prevents the pest attack.

« Mixed cropping: Is growing more than one crop.

« Inter cropping: Growing another crop along
with main crop, which increases the population
of natural enemy.

¢ Crop Rotation: Is growing of different crops in

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


sequence instead of one single crop.

¢ Keeping the fields clean: Managing the weeds
which provides home for pests, treating the
seeds with pesticides, growing the crops in sea-
sons where pest incidence is less, application of
correct dose of fertilizer at correct time, opti-
mum use of water are some of the agronomical
methods to control pests.

ik

Ladybird beetle

Pest load and monitoring

Pest monitoring: Is the practice of examining
the crop to know whether the pest has affected the
crop and the extent of damage to decide whether to
spray the pesticide or not.

Economic Threshold Level (ETL): ETL is
the pest population density at which the control
measure has to be taken up to prevent the pest from
reaching economic injury level.

ETL for some of the crops are as follows

¢ Brown plant hopper in paddy - nymph or adult
hopper 5-10 / hill

¢ Leaf miner in groundnut: 2 larvae / 10 plant or
20-30% plant infestation

« Whitefly in cotton: 5-10 adults / leaf or 20
nymphs / leaf

Biological control methods: There are several

biological agents that controls pest such as

¢ ‘The insect that kills another insect by living
inside its body is called Parasite. There is egg,
larval and pupal parasites. Trichogramma is an
egg parasite used commercially on sugarcane
borers.

¢ Predators are insects that eat other insects. For
example, the Ladybird Beetle, dragonfly, dam-
selfly, etc. Insects are also affected by many
diseases. Some are fungal, bacterial and viral.
Verticillium, a fungal agent, bacillus, a bacterial
agent, and NPV (Virus) are commercially used.

Physical Control

« An age old practice is to mix pulses with red
earth to protect pulses from pulse beetle.

« Drying of seeds in hot sun and using radiation
are some of the physical control methods.

Traps

« Light Trap: Most of the insects are attracted to-
wards light. This principle is used to monitor
and control pests.

« Pheromone Trap: Insects are trapped using the
scent of one sex. This is commonly used for the
control of cotton bollworms.

« Yellow Sticky Traps: Some of the small sucking
insects are attracted by yellow colour. Hence
yellow coloured containers smeared with sticky
materials are kept inside the field to attract
sucking insect.

Chemical control

Manual pesticide spraying

« Pesticide application is the last resort to control
pests.

« Pesticides to be selected carefully to control the
pests.

+ Dose and spraying equipments should be se-
lected carefully.

« Get the correct recommendation from the ex-
tension worker.

« Understand the difference between chemical
name and trade name. Trade name is the trader
given name but the chemical name is originated
based on the chemical ingredient.

Botanicals: are plant origin pesticides like neem
based formulations. We can also use neem seed

kernal extract or neem oil along with soap as pes-
ticides. Commercial botanicals are available in the
market and botanicals can be prepared, which cost
less and are eco friendly.


Plant Protection

For example, Neem Seed Kernal Extract (NSKE)
5%, Gronim, Achook and Neemazal.

3.7. Pesticides

esticides are the chemicals used to control pests.
The pesticides can be broadly classified into
three groups based on how they act on insects.

Contact and stomach poison: When insect
comes into contact or when the insect eats the pesti-
cide sprayed parts, it gets killed. Contact and stom-
ach poison is used for controlling larvae that feed
on leaves. Examples include Flubendamide. Some
of the pesticides derived from plants also have con-
tact action, for example pyrethrum, sabadilla, etc.

Manual Pesticide Spraying

Systemic poison: When the chemical is sprayed
on the plant, it is absorbed by the plant and trans-
ferred to the entire plant system. Sucking type of
pest like aphids, leafhoppers thrips suck the sap
from plants. This kind of sucking pests can be con-
trolled by systemic poison like Imidacloprid (To
be used with caution), flubendamide, acetamiprid,
thiamethoxam, etc.

1) Fumigant: Forms vapour and acts on breath-
ing system of the insects. When insects breathe
it, they get killed. Examples include, hydrogen
cyanamide, sulfuryl fluoride, etc.

Insecticides are poisons which cannot be used di-
rectly. They need to be used as per directions given
on the container or as per the recommendation of
extension workers. Insecticides are available in dif-
ferent forms of which some are:

i) Dust (D): Poisons are mixed with gypsum,
talc or clay so that it can be used in powder form.
There is no need to mix with water.

ii) Wettable Powders (WP/WDP):Mixed with
dry fillers with sticking agents but these dry
powders can be mixed with water.

iii) Granules (G): Dry formulations in which
poisons are mixed with calcium or gypsum in
granulated form. Main merit of this formulation
is handling will be easy, it is not carried away by
the wind and it is less toxic to plants.

iv) Liquid forms, Soluble Liquids (SL), Emulsifi-
able Concentrates (EC), and Soluble Concentrates
(SC): Liquid forms of pesticides. Since the pesti-
cides are directly soluble in water, they are mixed
with organic solvents, EC formulations disperse
in water easily as they are mixed with emulsifi-
ers.

v) Fumigants: are the poisons in gas form.
Normally it is used to fumigate godowns, grains,
storage rooms and ships even for rat control.

vi) Poison baits: Poisons mixed with food mate-
rial. The latter acts as attractants. Baits are exclu-
sively used to control rats. As the rats are more
sensitive, pre baiting is necessary.

3.8. Types of chemicals

¢ Organochlorines, Organophosphates, Carba-
mates, Synthetic Pyrethroids are types of chem-
icals which were used before, but are not rec-
ommended now.

¢ New Molecules: Invention is a continuous pro-
cess to identify more effective and less hazardous
chemical search for better insect management.
Examples include Nicotinamides, spinozids,
triazoles (Hexaconozole, Propiconozole).

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Plant Protection

3.9. Sprayers/Dusters:

Types of applicators
Based on what to apply
¢ Sprayers are used to sprinkle the soluble chemicals.
« Dusters are used to spread the dust formulation of the pesticide.
Based on power source
« Manually operated sprayers/duster
« Power operated sprayers/duster

¢ Fuel operated

« Battery operated

¢ Solar panel powered operated

« Self propelled; i.e. they have their own power source for movement

« Normally 50 -100 litres of spray fluid are required for an acre. If we use manually operated sprayers
200-250 litres of spray fluid are required to cover an acre.

« There are a number of models with a variety of features available in the market. One can choose the
model depending upon the requirement. Each instrument has got its own merits and demerits.

« Nozzle is the terminal part of the sprayer, which delivers the spray liquid to the plants. Different types
of nozzles are available for different purpose.

Types of sprayer

Battery Operated Sprayer Rocker Sprayer:
Capacity 16 litres A minimum of 3 persons are necessary. One per-
Battery 12V/8AH (Fuse:6A) son to use the lever to create pressure and other
Maintenance free Power Battery persons to spray.

Charger: Input: 220V/50HZ
Output: 12V/1000MA
Nozzle: Single, Double

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Plant Protection

Motorized Power Sprayer is used for spray-
ing of vegetable and ornamental crops in a large
area.

3.10. Integrated Pest Management
(IPM)

'T77PM is a sustainable approach for managing

pests by combining biological, cultural, physi-
cal and chemical tools in a way that minimizes eco-
nomic, health, and environmental risks."

3.11. Some insecticidal materials for
common household use

Kerosene emulsion

This is a contact insecticide useful against many
sucking insects. Finely divide 500 g of ordinary bar
soap and dissolve it in 4.5 litres of boiling water.
Cool and add 9 litres of kerosene. The mixture is
then vigorously agitated until the oil is completely
emulsified. The stock solution can be diluted with
15-20 times of water before spraying.

Battery Operated Power Sprayer meant for
use in the field.

Tobacco decoction

This is very effective for controlling aphids infesting
vegetable crops. Tobacco decoction can be prepared
by steaming 500 gm of tobacco in 4.5 litres of water
for 24 hours. Then, 320 gm of ordinary sliced bar
soap is dissolved separately in another vessel. The
soap solution is added to tobacco decoction and the
stock solution is diluted 6 - 7 times.

Neem seed suspension

This is very effective as a repellent against locusts
and grasshoppers. Kernels of mature neem fruits
should be crushed into a coarse powder. For obtain-
ing 0.1% concentration, 1 g of powdered neem seed
is required for a litre of water. The required quantity
of the coarse powder should be put in a small bag
of muslin cloth and dipped in water contained in
a bucket and squeezed till the water becomes light
brownish. This has to be sprayed on crops.

The latest registered chemicals are available in www.
cibrc.nic.in or please verify with extension officer.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Plant Protection

II. Disease Management

3.12. Disease

D*“ is an impairment of the normal state
of a plant that interrupts or modifies its vital
functions. All species of plants, wild and cultivated
alike are subject to disease. Although each species
is susceptible to characteristic diseases, these are, in
each case, relatively few in number. The occurrence
and prevalence of plant diseases vary from season
to season, depending on the presence of the patho-
gen, environmental conditions, and the crops and
varieties grown. Some plant varieties are particu-
larly subject to outbreaks of diseases.

Disease of crops and their importance

« Plant become diseased when it is continuously
disturbed by some causal agent including an
abnormal process that disrupts the plants.

¢ There are more than 80,000 plant diseases.

« Diseases reduce the yield of the crops and
sometimes lead to disaster e.g. late blight of po-
tato, Panama of banana, etc.

¢ Managing outbreak of diseases is challenge to
the farmer.

Causes of plant disease

Infectious diseases: caused due to fungi, bacte-
ria, viruses, nematodes, etc.

Non-infectious diseases: caused due to unfa-
vourable extraneous condition such as scorching
sunlight, high temperature, moisture stress or defi-
ciency of micronutrients, pH, heavy metal toxicity,
atmospheric pollution, etc.

3.13. The disease cycle

he main events of stages comprising the disease

cycle include the following: production and
dissemination of the primary inoculum, primary
infection, growth and development of the patho-
gen, secondary infection and over wintering.

The primary inoculum is the part of the pathogen
(that is, bacterial or fungal spores or fungal myce-
lium) that over winters (over-seasons) and causes
the first infection of the season, known as primary
infection. In general, the greater the amount of in-
oculum and the nearer it is to its host, the greater

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

the potential for a disease epidemic.

Dissemination refers to the spread or dispersal of
the pathogen from an inoculum source to a host.
Dissemination can occur by wind, splashing rain,
insects, infested pruning tools, infected or infested
transplants, and other means. Spread can occur
over short distances within the tree canopy or from
distant sources.

Primary infection occurs when the pathogen comes
into contact with a susceptible host under favour-
able environmental conditions. Pathogens pene-
trate the surface of a plant directly or enter through
wounds or natural openings.

Growth and development of a pathogen usually oc-
curs on or within infected plant tissue.

Secondary infection results from spores or cells
produced following primary infection or from
other secondary infections. The secondary infec-
tion cycle can be repeated many times during the
growing season. The number of cycles is dependent
on the biology of the pathogen and its host and the
duration of environmental conditions needed for
infection.

Over wintering or over seasoning is the ability of
a pathogen to survive from one growing season to
the next. Pathogens of apple survive the winter in a
number of different ways.

For a plant disease to occur, a susceptible host, a
pathogen (casual agent), and favourable environ-
mental conditions must be present and interact
with one another. If any one of these requirements
is not met, a plant disease will not occur. At pre-
sent, our ability to manipulate the environment is
limited to only a few practices such as pruning to
promote drying, bedding to improve soil drainage,
and scheduling of irrigation. Severe disease out-
breaks can be prevented by manipulating the host -
through the use of resistant cultivars - and the path-
ogen -- through cultural practices and fungicidal or
bactericidal sprays.

Plant Protection

3.14. Disease control measures of important crops

1. Siga-
toka leaf
spot

2. An-
thracnose

Bunchy-
top

On leaves small light yellow or brown-
ish green narrow streaks appear. They
enlarge in size becomes linear, oblong,
brown to black spots with dark brown
brand and yellow halo.

Black specks of fungal fructification
appear in the affected leaves. Rapid
drying and defoliation of the leaves.

The skin at the distal ends of the fin-
gers turn black, shrivels.

The fungus produces masses of conidia
which form a pinkish coat.

The entire fruit and bunch is affected
in severe cases.

Sometimes main stalk of bunch dis-
eased. The bunch becomes black and
rotten.

Acervuli produces cylindrical conidi-
ophores, hyaline, septate, branched.
Conidia hyaline, non-septate, oval to
elliptical.

Dark broken bands of green tissues on
the veins, leaves and petioles.

Plants are extremely stunted.

Leaves are reduced in size marginal
chlorosis and curling.

Leaves upright and become brittle.

Many leaves are crowded at the top.
Branches size will very small. If infect-
ed earlier no bunch will be produced.

The disease is transmitted primarily by
infected suckers.

Secondary spread is through the aphid
vector.

Remove affected leaves and burn.

Spray any one of the following fungi-
cides commencing from November
at monthly interval-difenoconazole
(2ml/litre), azoxystrobin (2ml/litre),
Copper oxychloride 2.5 g/lit.

Alternation of fungicides for every
spray prevents fungicidal resistance.

Always add 5 ml of wetting agent like
Sandovit, Triton AE, Teepol etc. per 10
lit of spray fluid.

Spray copper oxychloride 0.25% or
Bordeaux mixture 1%.

Post harvest dipping of fruits in
difenoconazole (2ml/litre).

Spray Methyl Demeton 2 ml/lit to
control it. The sprays may be directed
towards crown and pseudostem base
upto ground level at 21 days interval
atleast thrice.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Plant Protection

2. An-
thracnose
and stalk
end-rot

Yellowing of the lower most leaves
starting from margin to midrib of the
leaves.

Yellowing extends upwards and finally
heartleaf alone remains green for some
time and it is also affected.

The leaves break near the base and
hang down around pseudostem.

Longitudinal splitting of pseudostem.
Discolouration of vascular vessels as
red or brown streaks.

The fungus spreads through use of
infected rhizomes.

Continuous cultivation results in build
up of inoculum.

It attacks the leaves, flowers, stalks of
panicle and fruits.

Shedding of infected leaves occurs
when the disease is severe.

The affected fruits do not grow in size
& may drop before attaining pea size.
Produces leaf spots, blossom blight,
wither tip, twigs blight and fruit rot.

Small blister like spots develop on the
leaves and twigs.

Young leaves wither and dry Tender
twigs wither and die back symptom
appears.

Affected branches ultimately dry up.
Black spots appear on fruits.

The fruit pulp becomes hard, crack
and decay at ripening. Infected fruits
drop.

Uproot and destroy severely affected
plants.

Apply lime at 1 - 2 kg in the pits after
removal of the affected plants. In

the field, Panama wilt disease can be
prevented by corm injection methods.
A small portion of soil is removed to
expose the upper portion of the corm.

An oblique hole at 45° angle is made to
a depth of 10 cm. Capsule application
for 50 mg of Pseudomonas fluoresces
is injected into the hole with the help
of ‘corm injector’ on 2nd, 4th and 6th
month after planting.

Application of Sulphur dust (350
mesh) in the early morning will pro-
tect new flush or spraying Wettable
sulphur 0.2% will control powdery
mildew.

Pre-harvest spraying of Thiophanate
methyl 1g/lit 3 times at 15 days inter-
val will control anthracnose and stalk
end-rot.

The fungi produce mycelium which

is superficial and dark. They row on
sugary secretions of the plant hoppers.
Black encrustation is formed which
affect the photosynthetic activity.

The fungus grows on the leaf surface
on the sugary substances secreted by
jassids, aphids and scale insects.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Spraying thiamethoxam @ 2 ml/ litre

+ Maida 5% (1 kg Maida or starch)
boiled with 1 lit of water and diluted to
20 litres will control the incidence of
sooty mould.

Avoid spraying during cloudy weather.


1. Seed-
ling
diseases
(seed-rot,
rootrot,
and
damping
off

2. Fusari-
um wilt

3. Boll rot

The dark epicarp around the base of
the pedicel.

In the initial stage the affected area en-
larges to form a circular, black patch.

Under humid atmosphere extends
rapidly and turns the whole fruit com-
pletely black within two or three days.

The pulp becomes brown and some-
what softer.

Dead twigs and bark of the trees,
spread by rains.

Seed-rot, root-rot, pre emergence and-
post emergence damping-off.

Plants become stunted, yellowed, fol-
lowed by defoliation. Yellowing first
occurs around leaf edges and advances
inward. Cross sections of infected
stems usually reveals a brown Discol-
oration which is more intense in outer
layers of tissue. Infected plants fruit
earlier and produce smaller boll.

Boll rots usually first appear as water
soaked spots. Later, as infection-
spreads, bolls turn black and may be-
covered with a moldy fungus growth.

Badly infected bolls may drop from-
plant.

Plant Protection

Apply plant growth regulators (NAA/
GA/Ethephon @ 50-200ppm) at Bud
Inception stage.

Harvest mangoes on clear dry day.

Injury should be avoided to fruits at all
stages of handling.

Fungicide seed treatments help con-
trol seed rots and some pre emergence
damping off. However, an additional
soil treatment of fungicide must be
used to control root-rots and most
damping-off. In addition, producers
must follow all other recommended
cotton production practices to de-
crease seedling diseases. Some of
these practices include use of correct
planting equipment and date of plant-
ing, good seed bed preparation, cor-
rect use of herbicides and insecticides
and use of high germinating seed.
Reduce nematode population. Crop
rotations. Use resistant varieties.

Avoid excessive rates of nitrogen.
Practice skip-row planting. Timely de-
foliation will reduce boll rots. Reduce
insects which injure bolls. Growth
regulators such as Pix can be used ef-
fectively to reduce boll rots.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Plant Protection

Various types of leaf spots and blights.

Many spots occur on leaves toward
maturity, but these are not usually
damaging to the plant at this stage of
growth.

Use fungicide seed treatments. De-
stroy crop residues. Use crop rotations
and plant resistant varieties when
available (esp. when Bacterial Blight is
severe).

Keep potash levels at least medium to
high.

1. Root
rot, foot
rot and
gummosis

Seedlings may become infected and
turn yellow, dry out and die. Plants
that become infected later in the sea-
son are stunted and exhibit a yellow
condition along leaf margins and be-
tween the major vein. Severely affected
plants will shed their leaves. A brown
Discoloration of the interior of the
stem can usually be found later in the
season. This discoloration is.

Distributed evenly across the inside of
the stem.

Rotted roots, cracked bark, accom-
panied by gumming Water-soaked,
reddish-brown to black bark at the soil
line Discoloured tissue in the lower

trunk; yellowing, sparse foliage and
death of the tree.

Disease affecting citrus species that

is caused by the bacterial Infection
causes lesions on the leaves, stems, and
fruit of citrus trees. While not harmful
to humans, canker significantly af-
fects the vitality of citrus trees, causing
leaves and fruit to drop prematurely.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Plant resistant varieties when Verti-
cillium Wilt is severe. A variety that
matures very early may in some years
escape injury from Verticillium Wilt.

Two sprays with drenching either by
Fosetyl-Al (2.5g/L)or Metalaxyl MZ-
72(2.75g/1 water covering the whole
plant canopy and basin of affected
plant at 40 days interval after onset of
monsoon provided significant control
.For the control of gummosis, scraping
of the affected parts followed by appli-
cation of Metalaxyl? MZ-72 paste.
Pruning and destruction of infected
twigs followed by three to four sprays
with copper oxychloride (COC) 0.3%
+ streptocycline 100 ppm at monthly
intervals after the onset of monsoon.


3. Citrus
decline

Symptoms vary with the cause of Good cultural practices, improvement
the malady. The affected trees do not __ in soil fertility and drainage, control
always die completely, but remain ina _ of insect pests, nematodes, etc. may
state for decandance and unproductive be useful to minimize the incidence of
for a number of years. decline. Use of resistant rootstocks and
certified budwood for propagation is

Some-times they may suddenly wilt
also useful.

and die in a day or two. In early stages,
Symptoms are restricted to a few
limbs, but eventually the whole tree is
involved. Trees show sparse mottling
leaves, stunted growth, sickly appear-
ance. Midrib and lateral veins of old,
mature leaves turn yellow with in-
terveinal areas along the veins showing
diffuse yellowing.

Leaves may turn yellow and are shed
with the onset of summer or autumn
and the die-back of twigs starts. Dead
shoots stand out prominently and
may be found dead right down to the
main trunk. The entire tree bears short
twigs carrying narrow small leaves

on their lower portion. Subsequent
secondary growth consists of short,
upright small, weak shoots showing

a variety of discolouration of leaves.
Often these leaves have green veins of
green blotches. Occasionally, small,
circular, green spots appear on yel-
low tissue on leaves. The die-back of
weak shoots continues. There is exces-
sive flowering, but the fruits are not
carried to maturity. The fruits show
distinct sun-blotching. The feeder root
system becomes depleted, roots turn
black and sometimes are covered with
rotting bark. Either only a few trees or
entire orchard may be affected.


The benefits of seed treatment are as follows:

« Increased germination
he concept of seed treatment is the use and . Ensures uniform seedling emergence.

application of biological and chemical agents . Protect seeds or seedlings from early season

that control or contain primary soil and seed borne diseases and insect pests improving crop emer-
infestation of insects and diseases which pose dev- gence and its growth.

astating consequences to crop production andim- , Use of plant growth hormones may enhance
proving crop safety leading to good establishment of crop performance during the growing season.

healthy and vigorous plants resulting better yields. Rhizobium inoculation enhances the nitrogen fixing
capability of legume crops, and their productivity.
« Improved plant population and thus higher
productivity.

Trichoderma spp. 4-6 gm/kg. seed. For seed dressing metalseed dresser
/ earthern pots or polythene bags
are used.

Trichoderma 5-10 gm/kg. seed (before -do-
transplanting).

Pseudomonas flourescens 0.5% W.P. 10
gm/kg.

Seed soaking in 0.2% solution. -do-

Seed treatment with Trichoderma viri- -do-
de4g/kg.

Trichoderma viride @ 2 gm/kg. seed and ___-do-
Pseudomonas flourescens,@10gm/kg.

Captan 75 WS @ 1.5 to 2.5 gm a.i./litre

for soil drenching.

Imidacloprid 70 WS @ 10-15 gm a.i./kg
seed (To be used in proper doses under
guidance of an agriculture expert).

Trichoderma spp. @ 4 gm/kg. seed. For seed dressing metal seed dress-
er/earthern pots or polythene bags
are used.

Paecilomyces lilacinusand Pseudomonas - do-
fluorescens @ 10 gm/kg as seed dresser.

T. viride @ 2 gm/100gmseed. For seed dressing metal seed dress-
/earthern pots or polythene bags
Captan 75 WS @ 1.5 to 2.0 gm a.i./litre _ us us 3
are used.

for soil drenching.

Pseudomonas fluorescens and V. clamyd-
osporium @ 10gm/kg as seeddresser


of the following insecticides.

Carboxin 75 % WP.

per kg seed.

1% WP @ 9 gm/kg seeds.

minuts before storage.

Nemeeses are thread-like roundworms in-
visible to the naked eye. Species parasitic on
plants attack roots and other plant parts, causing
stunting and yield reduction. Nematode-infected
plants are not only weakened but their root systems
are more susceptible to secondary infections by
fungi or bacteria.

Correct identification is the first step when a nem-
atode problem is suspected. The second step is to
determine whether populations are high enough to
threaten the crop. Root knot nematodes, the most
common pathogenic nematodes in vegetables, can-
not penetrate roots when soil temperatures are
below 50 degrees E, and will not reproduce when
soil temperatures are below 58 degrees F. Their re-
productive rate is slower at cooler temperatures, so

Pseudomonas fluorescens @ 10gm/kg.

Trichoderma viride @ 6 gm/kg seed.

Treat the seed before sowing with any one

i) Chlorpyriphos @ 4 ml/kg seed (Best
available option and use with caution).

-do-

-do-

Thiamethoxam (0.2gm/litre of water)

For seed dressing metal seed dresser
/ earthern pots or polythene bags
are used.

Tebuconazole 2 DS @ 1.5 to 1.87 gm aii.

T. viride 1.15 % WP @ 4 gm/kg.

Seed treatment with Trichoderma viridi

Seed treatment with boric acid 3% for 20

populations build up more slowly. Thus, cool sea-
son crops are less likely to be damaged. E.g., early
spring potatoes, are rarely damaged by nematodes.

Nematode management practices

Isolation: Onceanematode problem is confirmed,
affected areas and plants should be isolated because
transplants, machinery and irrigation water can all
spread nematode infections. From initially small-
infested areas, nematodes can spread across a field
at a rate of 3 feet per year.

Crop rotation and cover crops: Crops suscep-
tible to root knot nematodes include all cole crop
species, beans, cucumber, muskmelon, watermelon,
bendi, potato, sweet potato and tomato. All pota-
toes are susceptible to nematodes except for a few
cultivars resistant to the golden nematode.


Plant Protection

Rotation to non-host crops such as corn, cucurbits,
potatoes and tomatoes is an effective control for the
cyst nematode. But is less likely to control the root
knot nematode because of its wider host range. All
species of Meloidogyne are called 'root knot’ nema-
tode but each species has a different host range,
causing confusion over which crops or cultivars are
resistant or tolerant to which species of root knot
nematode. Rotations to non-host crops for more
than a year reduce populations below damaging
levels but will not eliminate them.

Cover crops: significantly reduce subsequent
damage to crop.

Higher soil
organic matter content protects plants against nem- P ;
atodes by increasing soil water-holding capacity Wilt affected redgram plant
and enhancing the activity of naturally-occurring
biological organisms that compete with nematodes
in the soil.

Fallow Period: A fallow period of two years
with no susceptible plants in the field decreases
nematode populations. Marigold as a rotation
crop suppress nematodes. ae

Red rot in sugarcane
Nematode resistant cultivars

may be used to reduce the incidence of nematodes
Symptoms

¢ Understanding symptom and description of
disease will help in identification at field level.

Bacterial blight of paddy

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Plant Protection

3.17. Control measures - Tipsforthe -
farmers

* Correct identification of disease in your farm is
essential for effective control of disease.

« With little experience, you can identify the dis-
ease. However you can contact agricultural of-
ficers of your area along with disease specimen .
and seek their help in identifying the disease.

« You can also give disease-affected plant parts to
the Agri clinics for clinical test before under-
taking control measures. .

¢ Follow Integrated Diseases Management such
as host plant resistance, agronomic practices,
judicious use of fungicides, pesticides for vec-  «
tor control, bio-pesticides for pathogen control
etc., as indicated below.

3.18. Integrated disease management
practices in the field

« Select varieties and hybrids resistant to the
most common or economically important dis-
eases in consultation with agricultural officers
of your area.

For example:

« Plant only good quality, disease-free seed hav-
ing good germination. E.g. Cotton seed hav-
ing above 80% germination will have vigorous
growth and will not suffer from infection of soil
borne diseases

« Use seed-treatment with fungicides to control
diseases.

« Plant when soil temperature and moisture are
most favourable for specific crop. E.g: If the
farmers take up sowing of cotton during the
warmer temperature (>65 F), there will be bet-
ter germination and growth.

Avoid planting the same crop in a field year af-
ter year. E.g.:

I) Growing paddy in the Veriticillium wilt in-
fested field will reduce the incidence of micro-

bial population in the soil.

II) Growing Chrysanthemum will inhibit the
growth of the Veriticillium in the soil.
Incorporate the crop residues of the previous
crop by tilling well before planting season. E.g.
Disease affected plants should be burnt imme-
diately.

Choose right sowing time and maintain ap-
propriate plant population by adopting recom-
mended spacing.

Apply a balanced fertilizers based on a soil test.
E.g.: Potassium deficiency leads to susceptibil-
ity of Alternaria leaf spot.

Apply recommended amount of Farmyard Ma-
nures/compost at regular intervals and main-
tain soil-organic matter content. E.g.: Over
dose of chemical fertilisers lead to more vegeta-
tive growth and more disease.

Enrich soil with beneficial micro-organisms
like Trichoderma.

Keep the land weed free. Weeds can serve as
alternate hosts for pathogens and helps disease
development.

Timing and duration of irrigation should match
the crop and water requirement without allow-
ing for excess water. E.g.: Excessive irrigation
favour soil borne pathogen

Maintain insect population below ETL to re-
duce the incident of disease transfer by insects.
Regular crop monitoring is essential for effec-
tive disease management.

Use bio-pesticide as far as possible to control
disease. Chemical may be used only as last re-
sort.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Plant Protection

III. Weed Management

3.19. Weed and its relevance in crop 3.20. Critical period of weed compe-
production tition for important crops

« Weeds are the plants, which grow where they
are not wanted

« Weeds compete with crops for water, soil nutri-
ents, light and space

« Weeds reduce crop yields to the extent of up to
50 percent

« Critical period of weed competition is approxi-
mately 1/3rd of the duration of the crop

Characteristics of weeds: “One year
seeding, seven years weeding”

« Produces larger number of seeds compared to
crops. E.g.: Amaranthus retroflexus produces
1,96,405 seeds/plant, whereas wheat & rice pro-
duces only 90 to 100 seeds/plant

« Most of the weed seeds are small in size

« Easy and diverse means of seed dispersion

« Seeds germinate earlier and grow faster

¢ Flower earlier and mature ahead of the crop

« Germinate under tough conditions, season
bound

« Seeds are dormant for long period and germi-
nate during suitable season

* Good viability for years

« Tolerate moisture stress

« Possess stronger and deeper root system

Effect of weed competition on crop
growth and yield

« Crop suffers from nutritional deficiency
« Growth is reduced

« Water requirement will be more

¢ Lowers the input response

¢ Pest and disease incidence will be more
« Yield is affected

¢ Cost of production will increase

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Plant Protection

3.21. Different types of common weeds

GRASSY WEEDS

Brachiaria reptans Chloris inflata
Syn: Chloris barbata

Dactyloctenium aegyptium Digitaria bicornis

Dinebra arabica Dinebra retroflexa

Echinochloa colona E. crus-galli Echinocloa glabrescens

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Abutilon indicum

Achyranthes aspera

Aeschynomene indica

Alternanthera paranychioides

Alternanthera sessilis Alternanthera pungens Allmania nodiflora


Plant Protection

Cyperus castaneus Cyperus comprestris Cyperus ‘difformis
Cyperus digitatus Cyperus halpan Cyperus iria

yperus Fyebaticten Cyperus rotundus
pg P odoratus

Cyperus tenuculmis Fi rer ityis aestivalis Fimbristylis argentea

Syn: C. zotlingeri

Fi imbr istylis complanata Fimbristylis milliacea Fimbristylis woodrowii

Source: Directorate of Weed Science Research, Jabalpur

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Plant Protection

3.22. Control measures of weeds

Principles of weed control

e Prevention

¢ Eradication

¢ Control

e Management

a) Preventive weed control

¢ Avoid using crop that are infested with weed
seeds for sowing

¢ Avoid adding weeds to the manure pits

¢ Nursery or planting material should be free
from weeds

¢ Keep irrigation channels, fence-lines and un-
cropped areas clean

« Constantly look for weed, destroy the weeds
then and there

¢ Use good quality certified seeds, which are free
from weed seeds

¢ Use pre-emergence herbicides to prevent ger-
mination of weeds

b) Eradication (complete removal): Weeds are
killed or completely removed from a given area, will
not reappear unless it is introduced again. However,
¢ = It is very difficult

¢ Involves high cost

« Can be used in green houses and nurseries

c) Control: Weeds growth is restricted and killed
when necessary so that it does not affect crop
growth.

d) Weed management: Managing the population
of weeds using all possible methods.

(i) Mechanical method:

¢ Tillage: Using plough or disc, weeds are re-
moved from soil and exposed to sunlight.

¢ Hoeing: Using hand hoe, annual and bienni-
als are completely removed.

¢ Hand weeding: Either by physical removal or
pulling out of weeds by hand or using some
implements.

« Digging: Advisable in the case of perennial
weeds.

¢ Using sickle: Top portion of weeds are re-
moved using sickle, thereby weeds seed pro-
duction is controlled.

¢ Burning: Burning is often an economical and
practical means of controlling weeds but not

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

always possible in crop production field.

¢ Flooding: Kills weeds by reducing oxygen to
plant growth. This is possible only under gar-
den land or wetland condition.

Merits of mechanical method

¢ Oldest and effective method

¢ Safe method for environment

¢ High skill is not necessary

¢ Weeding is possible in between plants

¢ Deep rooted weeds can be controlled effec-
tively

Demerits of mechanical method
¢ Labour and time consuming
¢ Possibility of crop damage

¢ Requires ideal moisture

* Costly

ii) Cultural weed control

¢ Summer ploughing: Is done immediately af-
ter summer showers. This exposes weeds to
hot sun.

¢ Field preparation: Makes the field weed free
by constant removal.

¢ Select crop that can compete better with
weeds like cowpea, sudan gross, sorghum are
good competitors. Fast growing crops sup-
presses the weed effectively.

e Maintenance of optimum plant population:
Adequate plant population covers the land
and, hence, growth of the weed will be dif-
ficult. Close row crops are better than wide
row.

¢ Crop rotation: Minimize the dominance of
particular weed in the cropping system.

¢ Growing of intercrops: Inter cropping cov-
ers the land quickly and reduce growth of
the weeds. E.g,: Growing crop such as cow-
pea/ soybean, etc. in wide spaced crops like
maize/pigeon pea/sugar cane, etc.

e Mulching: Mulch is a protective covering
of material maintained on soil surface. It
has smothering effect and reduces the weed
growth. Mulching can be done through de-
gradable farm waste or through plastic sheets.
In case of plastic, black is the most popular
colour used in commercial horticulture crop
production, especially for weed control.

¢ Solarisation: Done by covering the pre soaked
field with transparent polythene cover, which
increases the temperature by 5 - 10 °C.

« Stale seedbed: Weeds are allowed to germi-
nate and non-residual herbicide is sprayed
to kill the young weed seedlings.

« Blind tillage: Ploughing after sowing of the
crop and before plants emerge. Normally
seed drills are used under rainfed condition
for this purpose.

« Crop management practices: Vigorous and
fast growing crop varieties for better compe-
tition with weeds.

Merits of cultural method

« Lowcost

« Easy to adopt

¢ Less technical skill is sufficient
« No damage to crops

¢ Effective weed control

Demerits of cultural method

+ Time taking and difficult

« Perennial and problematic weeds can not be
controlled

iii) Biological weed control: Natural enemy
of a weed plant is used to control the weed

Examples:
+ Zygogramma biolorata for control of Par-
thenium

« Hirsch - Manniella spinicaudata is a rice
root nematode to control most upland rice
weeds

« Azolla in rice

Advantages

« Eco friendly
e Easy

« Lowcost

Disadvantages

« They may have alternate host or switching
over to alternate host

« Multiplication of bio agent in many cases is
difficult

iv) Chemical Weed Control: Herbicides are
chemicals used to control weeds.

Merits
e« Recommended for adverse soil and climatic
conditions

« Applied even before weeds emerge and
make the environment weed free
« Suitable for all types of crops

Plant Protection

« Controls the targeted weeds only
« Controls many perennial weed species
¢ Cost effective compared to labour

Demerits

¢ Pollutes the environment

¢ Affects the soil

¢ Herbicide drift affects adjoining field

« Requires minimum technical knowledge

¢ Leaves residual effects

« Some herbicides are costly

¢ No suitable herbicides are available for
mixed and inter-cropping system

3.23. Classification of herbicides

Selective herbicide: Kills only weeds.

Non selective herbicide: Kills the entire
vegetation.

Pre-plant: Before sowing or along
sowing
Eg. Glyphosate for Hariyali, Basalin
for groundnut

ZN

7 NZ \ <>
Weed seed oS Sr weed

Pre emergence: Before weeds
germinate;Eg. Thiobencarb

‘sop
Ved «2 oe

Post emergence: applied after weeds
germinate
i) Eg. Bispyribac Sodium.

ii) iS i

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Emulsifiable Concentrate (EC): Liquid
form.

Wettable powders: Poisons mixed with

. : e Manual removal and destruction of Partheni-
inert carrier.

um plants before flowering using hand glouse/

Granules (G) poisons are mixed with machineries (or)

granular forms. ¢ Uniform spraying of sodium chloride 200g + 2
Water Soluble Concentrates (WSC) ml soap oil/litre of water (or)
fonmatareraleotarailatle « Spraying of 2,4-D sodium salt 8 g or glypho-

satel0 ml + 20g ammonium sulphate + 2 ml
soap solution/litre of water before flowering
(or)

« Post-emergence application of metribuzin 3 g /
litre of water under non-crop situation.

+ Spraying « Raising competitive plants like Cassia serecea

+ Broadcasting and Abutilon indicum on fallow lands to re-
place Parthenium (or)

« Biological control by Mexican beetle, fungal
pathogen and nematodes

Foliar application

Blanket spray: Both crop and weed is sprayed
with weedicide.

erennial weeds like Cyperus rotundus, cynodon

dactylon, etc. in orchards can be controlled ef-
fectively by spraying glyphosate! at 2.5 to 5.0 L ha-1
dissolved in 500 liters of water. Falling of the spray
fluid on young fruit plant foliage should be avoided.
Second spray is required when there is re-growth of
weed. (Cost Rs.700/- to 1400 ha).

« Select right kind of herbicide for right kind of

Blanket Spray crop and spray. Any mistake in choosing the
herbicide may result in loss of total crop.

« Dosage should be accurate and good quality of
water should be used.

« Use always correct nozzle for spraying. Spray-

Eg: Spraying glyphosate! in between rows of tapioca ing should be done from front to backwards.

using hood to control Hariyali. (We should not step into the sprayed field for a

minimum of 3 days).

Protected spray: Crops are covered and herbi- * The soil should have sufficient moisture for ef-

cides are sprayed on weeds. This method is expen- fective control.
sive. « For paddy, a thin film of water should be main-

tained for 3 days and it should not be drained.

Directed spray: Application of herbicides on
weeds only avoiding crop using hood.

Spot treatment: Applied only where weeds are
present.


x

here may be slight variation in doses. Please consult local Agricultural Extension Officer/Scien-

tists from KVK or read carefully the leaflet attached along with the herbicide:

Thiobencarb

Anilophos 0.40
Pendimethalin 0.90
Pendimethalin 0.90
(| 2,4-D Na salt 1.00
‘Maize Pendimethalin 0.75
Metolachlor 1.00
a Pendimethalin 1.00
Metolachlor 1.00
inal Pendimethalin 0.90
‘Vegetables Pendimethalin 1.00
‘Pulses Pendimethalin 0.60
Wheat Isoproturon 0.60
Citrus Glyphosate 4 4 Kg/ha

ometimes involves mixing of two or more her-
bicides used for effective and economical weed

control at reduced dosage.

Two types of mixtures available are:

Machete 50% EC Pre-emergence
Delchlor 50% EC

Thunder 50% EC Pre-emergence
Saturn 50% EC

Arozin 30% EC Pre-emergence
Aniloguard 30% EC

Stomp 30% EC Pre-emergence

Fernoxone 80% SS

Post-emergence

Stomp 30% EC Pre-emergence
Dual 50% EC Pre-emergence
Stomp 30% EC Pre-emergence
Dual 50% EC Pre-emergence
Stomp 30% EC Pre-emergence
Stomp 30% EC Pre-emergence
Stomp 30% EC Pre-emergence
Arelon 75% WP Pre-emergence

Mixing Ammonium sulphate with glyphosate in-
creases the efficiency where nitrogen increases the

translocation.

Post-emergence

1. Tank mixtures made with the desired propor-
tion of herbicides before application. eg: An-
ilophos + Bispyribac Sodium - Rice

Ready mix — formulated by the manufacturer.
Ready mix available in the world market eg:
Bispyribac Sodium+Glyphosate.

N

ombination of two or more weed control

methods at low input levels to reduce weed
composition in a given cropping system below the
economic threshold level. It:

Aims to minimize the residue problems
¢ Minimize the effect on the ecosystem


Plant Protection

3.31. Beneficial Effects of Weeds or
Economic Uses of Weeds

S

everal weeds have been put to certain economic
uses since ages. Some of the examples are:

Typha and Saccharum sp is used for making
ropes and thatch boards.

Chicory Cichorium intybus roots are used for
adding flavor to coffee powder.

Amaranthus viridis, Chenopodium album and
Portulaca sp. are used as leafy vegetable.
Hariyali grass (Cynodon dactylon) and
Cenchrus Ciliaris, Dichanthium Annulatum
andEclipta alba weeds of grass land serve as
food for animals.

Weeds act as alternate host for predators and
parasites of insect pests, which feed on the
weeds. For example, Trichogramma chilonis
feed upon eggs of caster semi looper, which
damage the castor plants. E.g. Commelina sp
(Copper), Eichornia crassipes (Copper Zinc,
lead and cadmium in water bodies.

Several species of weeds like Tephorsia purpu-
rea and Croton sparsiflora in South India are
used as green manures, whereas Eichornia cras-
sipes and Pistia stratiotes are used for compost-
ing.

Argemone Mexicana is used for reclamation of
alkali soils.

Some weeds have medicinal properties and
used to cure snake bite (Leucas aspera), gastric
troubles (Calotropis procera), skin disorders
(Argemone mexicana) and jaundice (Phyllan-
thus nirur ) and Striga Orobanchioides to con-
trol diabetes.

Agarbathis (Cyperus rotundus), aromatic oils,
(Andropogan sp & Simbopogon sp) are pre-
pared from weeds.

Air pollution determined by wild mustard and
chickweed respectively.

Aquatic weeds are useful in paper, pulp and
fiber industry.

Chenopodium album is used as mulch to re-
duce evaporation losses, whereas Agropyron
repens (quack grass) is used to control soil ero-
sion because of its prolific root system.

Weeds like Lantana camara, Amaranthus vir-
idis, Chenopodium Albu and Eichhornia cras-
sipes are used for beautification.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

3

1.

Agropyron repense are used for soil conserva-
tion, whereas Dicanthium Annulatum are used
as stabilizing field bunds.

Opuntia Dellini is used as biological fence.

.34. Lessons Learnt

Not all insects are harmful. Farmers need
to identify beneficial and harmful insects.
Summer ploughing, growing trap crops,
adopting mixed cropping, intercropping,
crop rotation and keeping the field clean
are the important agronomical practices
farmers needs to follow for effective pest
management.

Farmers need to understand the Economic
Threshold level of major pest of the crops
grown.

Biological control methods results in sus-
tainable pest control.

Farmers are advised to harvest the fruits
and vegetables after the waiting period to
minimize the residual effect.

Seed treatment prevents soil and seed
borne infestation of insects and diseases
Select varieties and hybrids resistant to
most common and economically impor-
tant diseases.

One year seeding, seven years weeding.
Hence, prevent spreading of seeds of
weeds.

Plant Protection

Categories of Pesticides and Precautions

Label of Toxicity
Flubendiamide To be used with Caution.

Emamectin Benzoate | Macrocyclic Lactone - To be used with Caution.
Avermectin

Spinosad Macrocyclic Lactone - | Category B To be used with great caution
Spinosyn (since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-

culture Expert.

Acetamiprid To be used with Caution.

Imidacloprid Neonicotinoids Category B To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-
culture Expert.

Thiamethoxam Neonicotinoids Category B To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-
culture Expert.

Chlorpyriphos Organothiophosphate | Category B To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-
culture Expert.

Profenophos Organothiophosphate | Category B To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-
culture Expert.

Fenazaquin Unclassified Category B To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and un-
der the guidance of an Agricul-
ture Expert.

Fungicide Group Label of Toxicity | Precaution

Thiophanate methyl | Benzimidazole Category B To be used with great caution
precursor (since highly hazardous for
human health and/or environ-
ment) and under the guidance
of an Agriculture Expert.

Carboxin Carboxamide/ oxathin To be used with Caution.

Copper oxychloride | Inorganic copper To be used with caution and un-
der the guidance of an Agricul-
ture Expert.

organophosphorus To be used with Caution.

Captan Phthalimide Category B To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-
culture Expert.

Metalaxyl phenylamide To be used with caution and un-
der the guidance of an Agricul-
ture Expert.

Azoxystrobin Strobilurins To be used with Caution.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Plant Protection

Difenoconazole Triazoles To be used with caution and un-
der the guidance of an Agricul-
ture Expert.

Triadimefon Triazoles To be used with great caution

and under the guidance of an
Agriculture Expert.

Tebuconazole Triazoles To be used with caution and un-
der the guidance of an Agricul-
ture Expert.

Label of Toxicity

2,4-D Chlorophenoxy acid To be used with caution and un-
or ester der the guidance of an Agricul-

ture Expert.

Butachlor Chloroacetanilide To be used with great caution
and under the guidance of an
Agriculture Expert.

Metolachlor Chloroacetanilide To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-
culture Expert.

Fluchloralin Dinitroaniline To be used with caution and un-
der the guidance of an Agricul-
ture Expert.

Pendimethalin Dinitroaniline To be used with caution and un-
der the guidance of an Agricul-
ture Expert.

Anilophos Organophosphorus To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-
culture Expert.

Diuron Phenylurea To be used with great caution,
since probably carcinogenic,
and under the guidance of an
Agriculture Expert.

Isoproturon Phenylurea To be used with caution and un-
der the guidance of an Agricul-
ture Expert.

Glyphosate Phosphonoglycine To be used with great caution,
since probably carcinogenic,
and under the guidance of an
Agriculture Expert.

Atrazine Triazines To be used with great caution
and under the guidance of an
Agriculture Expert.

Thiobencarb Thiocarbamate To be used with great caution
(since toxic to bees etc.) and
under the guidance of an Agri-
culture Expert.

Metribuzin Triazinone To be used with great caution
and under the guidance of an
Agriculture Expert.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


4. Farm Management

4.1. Objectives of the session

« To equip the farmer to take advantage of improved technologies and market opportunities to increase
income.

« To assist the farmer to make proper plan and adopts his production to assure food security for the
family.

« Toempower the farmer for professional negotiations with buyers, input dealers and credit institutions.

« To educate the farmer to make profitable decisions considering available resources and anticipate risks

including market fluctuations.

4.2. What we know at the end of the session

« Importance of farm management

« Basic information which support better farm management decision

« Market driven enterprises

« Matching resources with calendar of activities
« Selection of cropping pattern

« Understanding of cost benefit analysis

« Risk analysis in agriculture

Module 1: Is farming a business?

What is a farm?

arm is a socio economic unit. It is composed of

farm family, farm enterprises and structures.
Farmer is a grower cum manager. The farmer has
to decide how much land, labour, capital and type
of technology to use to produce in a given season.
Ultimately, the farmer has to earn a profit to sup-
port his livelihood.

What will the farmer do in farm man-
agement?
The farmer would efficiently use the available re-

sources to increase profits through deciding among
the best alternatives available.

Some basic functions of farm manage-
ment

The farmer performs following basic functions to
effectively manage the farm:

Diagnosis: Analysis of past performance of farm,
its weakness/strengths.

Planning: Planning for the future crops/animals
considering the opportunities and threats.

Implementation: Efficient implementation with
least cost.

Monitoring: Reduce the losses and increase the
profits by reducing the costs and choosing better
technologies based on the observed opportunities.

Evaluation: Evaluating the actions for repeating
the succeses in future.

What will happen if the farmer does
not do farm management?

In the absence of good farm management, the
farmer may experience losses in farming for the fol-
lowing the reasons:

« There is continuous changes in supply and price
of agri inputs like seeds, fertilizers, irrigation,
power etc.

« There is continuous change in prices of the pro-
duce (outputs) in the market due to demand
and supply changes.

« ‘There is continuous change in the farm tech-
nologies.


Farm Management

Therefore the objectives of farming as a
business are:

¢ How to choose best variety/crop/cropping pat-
tern

¢ How to minimise input cost by judicious use

¢ How to increase the production and productiv-
ity

¢ How to enhance the quality

¢ How to plan market driven production

¢ Choosing the better source of finance and bet-
ter avenues for investment

¢ Efficient risk management

For better farm management, the farm-
er should have thorough knowledge of
the following aspects:

« Farm map

¢ Soil slope and topography

¢ Soil type (physical and chemical properties)

¢ Soil colour such as red soil or black soil

¢ Weather parameter such as rainfall, tempera-
ture, relative humidity, etc.

« Vegetative cover such as trees, weeds, etc.

¢ Irrigation potential from borewell/tubewell/
nala/channels

« Drainage facilities - whether water gets logged
or not

¢ Technology available and whether the farmer
can access them easily

¢ Risk factors like hand loans and high rate of in-
terest

« Market facilities - whether they are near to his
farm or far off

« Communication facilities like cell phone and
internet connectivity

¢ Physical and infrastructure facilities such as
godowns, roads for transport, vehicles, custom
hiring centers, etc.

« Whether a farmer can afford the crop/animal
he/she wishes to grow or rear considering the
above conditions

¢ Supporting programmes and schemes/subsi-
dies

Farmers should maintain farm records
to have a holistic knowledge of their
production system

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

For example: If a farmer maintains a record for all
the cost of production such as inputs, labour, etc.
for the entire crop cycle along with yield and in-
come obtained from selling the produce, he/she
can compare with the next crop cycle to understand
whether his/her profit increased or decreased. The
records also provides information on activities
which contributed for his/her profit or loss so that,
the farmer can take alternative decisions to enhance
his/her net income.

Farm Resources: To make good farm manage-
ment decisions, farmers need some basic knowl-
edge on farm resources such as the extent of land
available for cultivation, source of irrigation, family
labour, availability of labour, skill level of labours,
livestock, availability of fodder, availability of farm
machinery, availability of inputs such as seeds
and fertilizers, credit requirement and availability,
source of credit, market demand for produce, in-
frastructure such as cold storage and godowns. etc.
For example, regarding manpower and livestock the
farmers have to understand following issue:

Man Power
« Skill: Is the labour employed is skilled, e.g. cot-
ton picking skill?

« Knowledge: Does the farmer/labour have a
thorough knowledge of the package of practices
of the crop?

« Attitude: Does he/she have a positive attitude
towards the technology?

Live Stock

« Breed: Selection of a suitable breed

« Production capacity: For instance, milk produc-
tion, meat production and egg laying capacity.

« Adaptability: Does the selected breed adapt to
the local situation?

« Drafting capacity: Knowledge on the draught
capacity of animal.

+ Resistance: Is the foreign breeds resistant to lo-
cal Indian conditions. E.g. the Holstein Fresian
is highly sensitive to high temperatures.

« Feeding habit: Are the upgrade breeds or im-
ported breeds capable of feeding on locally
available feed materials

Module 2: Know your farm resources

Plough, hoe, spray- Family and Paid Self finance and Own / Rented land
er, thresher, Tractors workers credit Share-cropping

What does one need to know about the market if one wants to do good business?

The location of the market The locations of sale
Who is the buyer? Who sells the inputs and equipments?

The quality of product that is demanded by the The quality of inputs and equipment
market

The price of the product compared to other mar- _ The price of sale of the inputs and equipments
kets

When to sell When to buy

How does the price of agricultural products change?

At times of abundance, the prices are lowest The price of a product that is needed by more and
more people will rise from one year to the next
At times of scarcity, the prices are highest The price a product that is produced in greater

abundance will fall from one year to the next
The quality of inputs and equipment

The price of sale of the inputs and equipments
When to buy

Important Lesson

o DO successful farm business, the farmer must be well aware of prices (of inputs and produce) at dif-
ferent markets. This allows the farmer to plan production as well as make decisions on the purchase of
inputs and the sale of produce.

Module 3: Manage your farm for enough income to

sustain yourself
FARM PLANNING: Farm planning is to help * Animal component based (diary, poultry, goat-
the farmers to move to a higher level of production ery, piggery, duckery, etc.)

and income, starting from where he/she is now with * Nursery/orchard

the resource available to him/her. In this process, * Non-land based (mushroom, apiculture, ver-

the farmer has to consider different types of enter- miculture, etc.)

prises like:

« Land based (agril. production activities, pisci-
culture, plantation, seed production, etc.)

In the present example, three crops namely paddy,
cotton and maize have been taken into comparison


Farm Management

for one season. With these three crops, farmerscan + Paddy - Paddy (Kharif followed by Rabi)

grow the following combinations in a year: « Paddy - Maize (Kharif followed by Rabi)
« Cotton — Maize (Kharif followed by Rabi)
« Maize - Maize (Kharif followed by Rabi)

Exercise 1: Agricultural Calendar of Operations to Plan the Production of Paddy.

Sat!

es Apply insecticide

Harvest and store

Important Lesson:

For a good yield, the farmer plans to do the necessary work in the field and apply the inputs at the right
time based on the calendar of operations throughout the year

Here we will see how to determine if farm business was good or bad. We will calculate the “Income” and
“Expenditure” from different produce. Master Trainers may give the following exercise sheet to the farm-
ers to work out the details for the respective crops by changing the relevant package of practices as appli-
cable to local situations.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farm Management

Exercise Sheet 2: Paddy

Blank sheet to be filled by Farmer based on worked solution given below.

Steps:

¢ Multiply the quantity with the price in each line

« Add the money spent (“Expenditure”) on inputs and labour
¢ Multiply the yield by the price of sale (“Income”)

« Subtract the sum of “money-out” from the “Income”

« Determine if there was a gain or a loss

b) Cost of seed treatment

c) Cost of sowing (Human Labour)

d) Cost of thinning/gap filling

a) Cost of organic & Green Manuring (In-
situ plouging)
b) Application cost

b) Cost of pesticides (Thiamethoxam/pro-
fenophos)

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farm Management

Furadon-3G

c) Cost of Application
Sub-Total

Irrigation cost if any
Sub-Total
Cost of harvest

a) Combined harvester

Post harvest charges

b) Gross returns received per ha (Rs.)

c) Total cost involved per Ha (Rs.)
d) Net returns per Ha (Rs.)

e) Cost benefit ratio (Gross Returns divided
by Total Cost)

Solution to exercise 2 - Paddy

Cost of Cultivation of Paddy (per hectare)

Preparatory cultivation

a) Machine / labour No of hours 800
b) Animal / labour Days 600

Sub Total

Seeds and sowing
a) Cost of seed
b) Cost of seed treatment

c) Cost of sowing (Human Labour)

d) Cost of thinning/gap filling
Sub-Total

Manures and Fertilizers

a) Cost of organic & Green Manuring (In-
situ plouging)

b) Application cost FT

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farm Management

c) Cost of fertilizer 1440
3000
1120

a) Cost of Manual weeding

b) Cost of herbicide if any (butachlor) Litre 2.5 200
Sub-Total

a) Cost of bio-agents

b) Cost of pesticides (Thiamethoxam/pro- Litres 5 35
fenophos)

Furadon-3G Kg 15

Cost of harvest

a) Combined harvester 4.

Post harvest charges

Irrigation cost if any Power 5 months 5 2500
Sub-Total 2500

0
00
Sub-Total 3850
00
0

|
ee
b) Cleaning and bagging (Human Labor) | days | 10 | 200 | 2000
Sub total
Total cost of cultivation —
ee ee
ats

Yield Kgs/Ha. and returns

a) Qty. produced Qtls. per ha qtls
b) Gross returns received per ha (Rs.) | Cartlod | 8
c) Total cost involved per Ha (Rs.) |

d) Net returns per Ha (Rs.)

e) Cost benefit ratio (Gross Returns divided
by Total Cost)
e) Cost benefit ratio 1:1.76

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farm Management

Exercise 1: Agricultural Calendar of Operations to Plan the Production of Maize

Important Lesson:

For a good yield, the farmer plans to do the necessary work in the field and apply the inputs at the right
time based on the calender of operations throughout the year.

Here we will see how to determine if farm business was good or bad. We will calculate the “Income” and
“Expenditure” from different produce. Master Trainer may give the following exercise sheet to the farmers
to work out the details for the respective crops by changing the relevant package of practices as applicable
to local situations.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Farm Management

Exercise Sheet - 2 (Maize - Blank sheet to be filled by Farmer based on worked
solution given below.

Steps:

¢ Multiply the quantity with the price in each line

« Add the money spent (“Expenditure”) on inputs and labour
¢ Multiply the yield by the price of sale (“Income”)

« Subtract the sum of “money-out” from the “Income”

« Determine if there was a gain or a loss

d) Cost of thinning/gap filling
Sub-Total

Manures and Fertilizers

c) Cost of fertilizer

a) Cost of bio-agents

b) Cost of pesticides (Thiamethoxam/pro-
fenophos)

Furadon-3G

c) Cost of Application
Sub-Total

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farm Management

Irrigation cost if any

Sub-Total

Cost of harvest
a) Combined harvester

Post harvest charges

by Total Cost)

Solution to exercise 2 - Maize

Cost of Cultivation of Maize (per hectare)

Manures and Fertilizers

c) Cost of fertilizer

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farm Management

a) Cost of Manual weeding
b) Cost of herbicide if any (butachlor)
Sub-Total

Plant Protection

b) Cost of pesticides 5

c) Cost of Application Labour
Sub-Total

Irrigation cost if any

Sub-Total

Cost of harvest |

b) Threshing (machine) quintals
Post harvest charges —
b) Cleaning and bagging (Human Labor) days

Sub total

Total cost of cultivation |

Yield Kgs/Ha. and returns

a) Qty. produced Qtls. per ha qtls 40000
b) Gross returns received per ha (Rs.) Cart load 2000
c) Total cost involved per Ha (Rs.) |

d) Net returns per Ha (Rs.)

e) Cost benefit ratio (Gross Returns divided
by Total Cost)
e) Cost benefit ratio

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farm Management

Exercise 1: Agricultural Calendar - Operations to Plan the Production of Cotton

Fertilizer
| application

Important Lesson:

For a good yield, the farmer plans to do the necessary work in the field and apply the inputs at the right
time based on the calender of operations through out the year.

Here we will see how to determine if firm business was good or bad. We will calculate the “Income” and
“Expenditure” from different produce. Master Trainer may give the following exercise sheet to the farmers
to work out the details for the respective crops by changing the relevant package of practices as applicable
to local situations.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farm Management

Exercise Sheet - 2 (Cotton - Bt Cotton) - Blank sheet to be filled by Farmer based
on worked solution given below.

Steps:

¢ Multiply the quantity with the price in each line.

« Add the money spent (“Expenditure”) on inputs and labour
¢ Multiply the yield by the price of sale (“Income”)

« Subtract the sum of “money-out” from the “Income”

« Determine if there was a gain or a loss

Cost of Cultivation Cotton (per hectare)

b) Cost of seed treatment

c) Cost of sowing (Human Labour)

d) Cost of thinning/gap filling

b) Cost of herbicide if any (butachlor)
Sub-Total

Plant Protection

a) Cost of bio-agents

b) Cost of pesticides (Imidacloprid/Thia-
methoxam/profenophos)
Furadon-3G

c) Cost of Application | Labour | |

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farm Management

Irrigation cost if any

Sub-Total

Cost of harvest

d) Net returns per Ha (Rs.)

e) Cost benefit ratio (Gross Returns divided
by Total Cost)

Solution to exercise 3 — Cotton

Cost of Cultivation of Cotton (per hectare)

1800
3000
1680
4500

10,980

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farm Management

b) Cost of herbicide if any (butachlor) Days
Sub-Total 11250
Plant Protection

| a)Costofbio-agents Cost of bio- | a)Costofbio-agents

b) Cost of pesticides (Imidacloprid/ Thia- — =
methoxam/profenophos)
Furadon-3G 00 3G

Irrigation cost if any Power a
Sub-Total 3000
Cost of harvest

orang |)
SS
Takadofaiiaios
YeKgiiandwme
a

|b) Gross returns received perha(Rs.) | Gross returns received |b) Gross returns received perha(Rs.) | ha (Rs.) | 3600 | | 90000 |

c) Total cost involved per Ha (Rs.) 57154
oe

e) Cost benefit ratio — Returns divided 1:1.57

by Total Cost)

Note: The fixed cost and recurring cost like the interest, depreciation, opportunity cost, etc have not been
taken into calculation in the three crops above. Therefore, other things remaining constant, Only the vari-
able cost and returns have been used for the exercise.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Module 4: Income and expenditure statement

Comparing results to know whether you are doing successful farm business

Please tell what is good and what is bad business and indicate the reasons.

Quintal Main product = 40 q
P

By Product (stover/
Straw) = 4 cart load

Rs/ha 81400 42000 90000
Rs/ha 46160 31375 PYAb
Rs/ha + 35240 + 10625 + 32846

Profit Profit Profit
I Il I

Main Lessons

« To knowif you are doing successful business with a crop, you need to know the “Income” and
“Expenditure” accurately.
¢ The farmer records the inputs & labour used in a field, and calculates the “Income” and “Ex-

penditure”

¢ From the “Income” the farmer subtracts the Expenditure. The result indicates whether farm is
making profit or loss.

« The farmer makes a PROFIT or GOOD BUSINESS if the “Income” is greater than the “Ex-
penditure.”

« Itisa LOSS, ifthe “Expenditure” is greater than the “Income.” In that case it is BAD BUSINESS.

« A loss is illustrated by the the minus (dash) and a profit by the plus in front of the number.

« A good farmer will abandon loss making crop or use a better technique to make a profit.

¢ ‘Toensure a profit, the farmer needs to visualise Income and Expenditure before production.

« The Difference between Income and Expenditure indicates whether we are making a loss or
profit from the use of the land.

¢ The Unit Cost of a crop indicates if it can compete with the same crop produced elsewhere.
In the case of food crops, the Unit Cost indicates if it is preferable to buy the produce in the
market.

« The good farmer calculates well ahead of the season to decide what to produce and which
techniques to use.

« During the production season the good farmer keeps records on money spent for farm opera-
tions and inputs.

« After the harvest, the good farmer evaluates the profit and identifies what changes are needed
to improve the planning and profit for the next production season


ertain costs are called fixed costs. These are costs for equipment and tools that the farmer owns and
are used for various crops over several years, such as sprayers, irrigation pumps, buildings etc. The
Fixed Costs do not vary with the size of the field.

QD

Blank Exercise sheet of Income and Expenditure Statement: Comparing Results to know whether you are
doing successful Farm Business

After, all the calculations farmers will determine the opportunities to increase revenues. By looking at the
money on this page farmers will learn

How to make investment decisions and determine the best opportunities by using Gross Margin, La-
bour Productivity and Capital Productivity.

Rank crops based on Profit or Loss

What crops and techniques to choose?

Make a choice based on this ranking

Ha 1 1 1

Rs/ha

Rs/ha
Rs/ha
Rs/ha

Kg

Rs/kg
Rs/ha
Rs/ha

Rs/ha


Module 5: Manage your Money throughout the Year

How does one know if the money is managed badly?
What are the causes?
What must one do to manage money well during the year?

First Step: Please look at Income and Expenditure for different crops on the farm and also look at
household expenditures. Below are the expenditures of a Household of 5 persons (1 child not yet in
school, 1 child in primary school, 1 old parent along with husband and wife). We discuss if we can pre-

dict all these expenditures.

36,000 Each month
(3000 X12)

1,000 June Yes

5,000 April Yes

1000 November Yes

1000 January Yes

3600 Each month @ Rs No
300

2400 Per year No

50000

N
oO
a
=)
Ss
a
DN
=~
oO
>

Let us put these numbers into a financial calendar. On the next page you will see the numbers calcu-
lated in Module 5.

How much money is left at the end of each month?

How much money is left at the end of the year?

The trainer explains how to do it.


Farm Management

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

asloJaxy — (Sy) s9oK9eAd JUILIND SUISN ULL] & UO paseq Aepuszed [eIoueUy Appeg — Appeg :] ase


* As the income is realised only during May and November, the monthly balance is shown as negative
which indicates that the farmers raises a hand loan/personal loan or shall keep the gross income (Rs 81,400
X 2 = 162,800) and spend through out the year based on the need.

Note: In this example all produce from the farm is sold as per the prevailing market rates. The profit of the
farmer depends on the price for the produce i.e., whether the Minimum Support Price (MSP) or market
rates are prevailing - which are both fluctuating.

Third Step:

Fill the second financial calendar. The expenditures for inputs and labour are those from the exercise
Sheets in Module 5 - using improved practices.

Fourth Step:

Discuss the differences and which situation is preferable. What changes are necessary?

Main Lessons

¢ Inthe agricultural enterprise, expenditure for the farm and the household are incurred every
month. But the revenue comes only after sale of produce. Therefore there are months of the
year where the expenditures are greater than the revenues. These months are called “deficit
months.”

¢ For this reason, the good farmer makes a financial calendar. The farmer plans expenditures for
production and household needs in consultation with his spouse.

¢ To be able to cover the expenditures in deficit months, the good farmer saves money from the
sales of produce (“surplus months”).

« Improved techniques may contribute to improve the revenues of the farmer.

e The needs for inputs can be identified with calculations of gross margin and the financial cal-
endar. This information can be used to make savings in a targeted way or to solicit credit for
production.

¢ The above calculations are done for a farmer with one hectare for Paddy - Paddy combination
in Kharif and Rabi for one year. The same exercise should be repeated for taking farm manage-
ment decisions for the combinations such as
¢ Cotton - Maize (Kharif - Rabi)

« Paddy - Maize (Kharif - Rabi)
¢ Maize - Maize (Kharif — Rabi)

he farmer does not like risks because they are difficult to predict. However, he/she can determine the

risk during the planning so that the impact on revenues could be minimised. For example, Module 4
indicates income and expenditure of paddy, maize and cotton. With available data, Paddy - Paddy is the
best preferred cropping pattern. However, the farmer can make a judicious decision taking prevailing and
anticipated risks into considerations. The anticipated risks and possible decisions are as follows:

Reduction in Paddy Market price by 10% Cotton - Maize is preferred

Inadequate water due to drought for Paddy - Paddy Cotton - Maize is preferred followed by Maize
- Maize. Quantity of water available decides the
cropping pattern.


Lack of capital for investment for Paddy - Paddy or Paddy and Maize is preferred followed by Maize -

Cotton - Maize Maize
Serious pest problems in Cotton Paddy — Paddy is preferred
Main Lessons

« Comparing the gross margins of different crops and the production techniques, helps to make
decisions on using the land to maximise revenue. This comparison is important to all agricul-
tural entrepreneurs.

« Comparing the labour productivity helps to identify the crops and techniques that make best
use of labour (family or wage labour). It also indicates if it is profitable to work on your own
farm.

« Comparing the capital productivity indicates which crops or production techniques make
best use of money invested.

¢ Production decisions are based on these comparisons.

« The good agricultural entrepreneur knows that a fluctuation in prices constitutes a risk and
revenues. Risks are concern for traditional as well as improved varieties and techniques.

« To evaluate the impact of this market risk, the entrepreneur calculates estimated the gross
margin with a much lower price (pessimistic) than the current price (or last season's price). If
the pessimistic gross margin estimate can still satisfy the revenue objectives, then the risk is
acceptable.

« To evaluate the impact of production risks, the agricultural entrepreneurs calculates a gross
margin using a yield lower (pessimistic) than expected. If the pessimistic gross margin esti-
mate can still satisfy the revenue objectives, then the risk is acceptable.



Occupational Health and Safety

5.1. Objectives of the session

¢ To create an awareness about causes of health hazards, risks and fatalities in agriculture.
« To impart the knowledge on preventive measures of health hazards in agriculture.
¢ To enlighten the farmers on use of first aid in emergencies.

5.2. What we know at the end of the session

« Important occupational health hazards in agriculture

« Factors responsible for increasing risk of injury or illness for farmers

¢ Safe handling of agro chemicals

« Colour coding of pesticides

« First aid measures for pesticide poisoning

* Care in use of pesticides by farmers

« Safety tips to reduce the risk of injuries and fatalities while handling machineries
¢ First aid for accidents

ii agriculture, farmers work under open condition in natural environment, which expose them to vari-
ous occupational hazards, especially more caused due to handling of chemicals and machineries. Be-
sides, natural hazards are caused due to snakebite, wild animal attack, etc. Knowledge on preventive and
curative aspects of these occupational hazards would reduce risks and ensure the safety to the farmers.

5.3. Important occupational health hazards in agriculture

Dehydration, heat cramps, heat exhaus-
tion, heat stroke, skin cancer

Most agricultural operations are per-
formed outdoors

Close proximity results in high incidence

Fatal or injurious bites and stings

Most farm situations require a wide vari-
ety of skill levels for which workers have
little knowledge

Injuries ranging from cuts to fatalities

Back pain and body pain Agricultural work involves uncomfort-
able conditions and sustained carrying of
excessive loads

Pesticides can be hazardous and must be
used with Personal Protective Equipment
(PPE)

Acute poisoning or chronic poisoning

Irritation of the eyes and respiratory tract Agricultural workers are exposed to a
wide range of dusts and gases during
plant protection with few exposure con-

trols and limited use of PPE

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Occupational Health and Safety

Skin diseases such as fungal infections «

and allergic reactions

Parasitic diseases such as malaria,
sleeping sickness and hookworm
Animal related diseases such as an-
thrax, bovine tuberculosis and rabies
(at least 40 of the 250 animal related
diseases are occupational diseases in
agriculture)

Cancers

Electricity shocks, fire, road accidents,
livestock and wild animal attacks, fall-
ing into wells, lightening, psychologi-

Workers are in direct contact with en-
vironmental pathogens, fungi, infect-
ed animals, and allergenic plants
Workers have intimate contact with
parasites in soil, waste water/sewage,
dirty tools and unhygienic housing
Workers have ongoing, close contact
with animals through raising and
sheltering

Agricultural workers are exposed to
a mix of biological agents, pesticides,
and diesel fumes, all linked with can-
cer

Loss of life and injuries and suffering
to the dependents

cal depression, suicides, etc.

5.5. Factors that may increase risk of
injury or illness for farm workers

Age: Injury rates are highest under 15 and over 65
years of age.

Equipment and machinery: Most farm acci-
dents and fatalities involve machinery. Proper ma-
chine guarding and regular equipment maintenance
according to manufacturers’ recommendations can
help prevent accidents.

Non-availability of protective equipments:
Using protective equipment, such as seat belts on
tractors and personal protective equipment (such as
safety gloves, cover alls, boots, hats, aprons, goggles
and face shields) could significantly reduce farming
injuries.

Lack of medical care: Hospitals and emergency
medical care are typically not readily accessible in
rural areas near farms. However, the farmers may
utilize for example 108 mobile medical emergency
services during emergencies.

Socio - economic risks

+ There are dangers due to indiscriminate pes-
ticide/weedicide application to soil, water, air,
food chain, natural enemies of pest, resistance
of pest, etc.

« Pesticides are hazardous, so there will be asso-
ciated risk and impact of risk on social system

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Adapted from IFPRI, 2006

including economic damage. So there should
be a proper understanding on hazards of pes-
ticides.

Effects on human beings

¢ Pesticides accumulate in fatty tissues and re-
productive cells lead to birth defects, abnor-
malities, abortions, premature deliveries, etc.

« Farm workers who regularly spray pesticides
are susceptible to impaired eyesight.

¢ The liver is particularly susceptible to damage
by chlorinated hydrocarbons, which can lead to
higher risk of serious infection.

Environmental exposures lead to

¢ Air pollution
¢ Soil and water pollution
¢ Food contamination

Looking into the implications of pesticides on so-
cio-economic dimensions, use of pesticides should
be judiciously planned only in critical situations
with utmost care. Management of pest below Eco-
nomic Threshold Level (ETL) is most desirable.

5.6. Safe handling of agro chemicals

gro chemicals are widely used in agriculture,

which are major source of health hazards to
farmers. Important tips to farmers for safe use of
agro chemicals are as follows:

Buying pesticides

Before buying think over this

« Which pest is to be controlled?

« Is damage crossing threshold level requiring
pesticide use?

« Have you observed any predators that check
pest attack?

« What is the recommendation for the ob-
served problem?

« Which is the least toxic and low persistent
chemical among recommendations?

While buying

« Buy from a reputed and licensed store.

« Buy only required quantity and not to go for
bulk purchase.

« Do not buy leaky containers.

« See the expiry date.

« Buy only ISI/ BIS marked products.

« Dont buy banned and restricted chemicals.

Transportation

« Do not transport/carry pesticides along
with food products.

« Do not spill or allow leakage while trans-
porting.

« Ifleakage is observed clean the vehicle.

Storage

« Dont keep chemicals in kitchen or with
animal feed.

¢ Keep out of reach of children.

« Keep under lock and key.

« Keep in well ventilated separate room.

« Avoid cross contamination of different
chemicals.

« Do not keep with human or animal medi-
cine.

« Properly reseal before storing again.

Application

« Read the label and follow the instructions.

« Dont work alone while handling and apply-
ing.

¢ Dortt allow children and animals near mix-
ing and application site.

« Use long wooden stick for mixing.

« Mix only the quantity that you need for the
next application.

« Avoid excessive spraying and unintended
site application.

« Read the label and instructions carefully
before opening the pack.

Occupational Health and Safety

« Never eat and drink while applying.

« Use Personal Protective Equipment (PPE),
particularly long shirt and pants, closed
shoes as well as protection mask and gloves.

« Avoid application during rainy period.

« Never blow out clogged nozzles or hoses
with your mouth, use pin or fine wire for
cleaning.

« Avoid windy conditions and do not spray
against wind direction.

After application

« Immediately after application take bath and
change cloths.

« All clothes must be washed after spraying/
dusting and wash them separately.

« Never leave residues of pesticide in sprayers
and dusters.

« While cleaning see that water used for
cleaning should not enter the drinking wa-
ter stream/wells.

« Do not go into the treated field until the
recommended safety period has passed.

« Do not harvest produce before safe period.

Safe container disposal

« Burry the containers in the field after use.

« Dont use for food and feed storage.

¢ Do not sell empty container.

« Do not wash the used containers in commu-
nity water sources.

Colour Coding of pesticides:

The colour band on the pesticide container indi-
cates the hazard level of pesticides. While han-
dling pesticides farmers should take colour band
into consideration.

« Red - Very toxic to toxic

¢ Yellow - Harmful

« Blue - Moderately hazardous

« Green - Acute hazard unlikely in normal use

5.7. First aid measures for pesticide
poisoning

In case of skin contact, remove contaminant
contacts and wash with clean water.

In case of inhalation, remove from site and
provide good clean air site, keep the head and
shoulder upright.

In case of unconscious and breathing stops,
provide artificial respiration.

If pesticide is swallowed, induce vomiting by
giving 2-3 liters salt water. Give milk after that.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Occupational Health and Safety

« Take the patient to doctor at the earliest.
« Take the container along with patient to consult
doctor.

Snake and other animal bites or attacks
and precautions

Snakebite is a routinely occurring life threatening
emergency in India. The mortality and morbidity
associated with the diverse presentation of snake-
bites can be decreased if a proper history of the
patient's background and habits combined with a
thorough knowledge of the specific features of the
regional snakes are kept in mind.

Physical and mental drudgery

To reduce drudgery related to hard work in differ-
ent agricultural operations, several technologies for
land preparation, weeding, pesticide application
and various other farm works have been developed
including farm machinery which need to be used
by the farmers to keep themselves fit and healthy.
Farmers are advised to contact local extension
functionaries and scientists to obtain information
on such drudgery reducing farm machineries.

5.8. Care in use of pesticides by
farmers

Useful tips for safe use of pesticides by farm-
ers are:

Identify the pest and ascertain the damage done.
Use pesticide only if it has exceeded the economical injury level.
Use only the recommended pesticide, which is the least toxic.

Read instructions manual of the pesticide and equipment.
Check the spraying equipment and accessories, which are to be used.

Ascertain that all components are clean, especially filling and suction,
strainer, sprayer tank, cut off device and nozzle

Replace worn out parts such as ‘O’ ring, seal, gasket, worn out nozzle tip,
hose clamps and valves.

Test the sprayer and ascertain whether it pumps the required output at
rated pressure. Check the nozzle spray pattern and discharge rate.

Calibrate the sprayer. Set sprayer speed and nozzle swath by adjusting
spray height and nozzle spacing.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

Occupational Health and Safety

Make sure that appropriate protective clothing is available and is used
Train all concerned with the application and also understand the recom-
mendations. Ensure that soap, towel and plenty of water is available.

Pesticide should be kept in dry and locked store.

Take only sufficient pesticide for the day’s application from the store to the
site.

DO NOT transfer pesticides from original container and packing into the
containers.

Recheck the use instructions of pesticide and equipment.

Make sure pesticides are mixed in the correct quantities.

Wear appropriate clothing.
Avoid contamination of the skin especially eyes and mouth.
Liquid formulation should be poured carefully to avoid splashing.

Never eat, drink or smoke when mixing or applying pesticides. NEVER
blow out clogged nozzles or hoses with your mouth.

Follow correct spray technique. Spray plant crop thoroughly by operating
sprayer at correct speed and correct pressure.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Occupational Health and Safety

« Follow correct spray technique. Spray plant crop thoroughly by operating
sprayer at correct speed and correct pressure.

Never allow children or their unauthorized persons to be nearby during
mixing. Never leave pesticides unattended in the field.

Never spray if the wind is blowing towards grazing livestock or pastures
regularly used.

Spraying should be done in the direction of Wind.

= Remaining pesticides left in the tank after spraying should be emptied and
disposed off in pits dug on wasteland.
Never empty the tank into irrigation canals or ponds.

Never leave unused pesticides in sprayers. Always clean equipment prop-
erly. After use, oil it and then keep away in storeroom.

Do not use empty pesticide containers for any purpose.
Crush and bury the containers preferably in a land filled dump.

Clean buckets, sticks, measuring jars etc used in preparing the spray solu-
tion.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Occupational Health and Safety

Remove and wash protective clothing and footwear.
Wash yourself well and put on clean clothing.

Keep an accurate record of pesticide usage.

Prevent persons from entering treated areas until it is safe to do so.
Mark the sprayed plots with a flag.

5.9 Basic Measures to Manage
Weeds, Diseases and Pest Problems

« Prevention is better than cure, hence follow the
preventive measures discussed above

« Keep pest below ETL using preventive tech-
niques

« Give more attention to pest warnings by Agri-
culture Department officials and experts

« Be watch full on weather forecast by ICAR and
IMD

« Consult KVK or Scientist in early stages

« Discuss the problems with fellow farmers, you
may get many traditional tips

« Understand the scientific rationale behind each
pest management ITKs

« Have regular contact with local Research and
Development wings of agriculture and allied
sectors to get a recent development.

5.10. Safety tips to reduce the risk of
injuries and fatalities while handling
machineries

Cuey to the popular image of fresh air and
peaceful surroundings, a farm is not a hazard
free work setting. Every year, thousands of farm
workers are injured and hundreds die in farming
accidents. Safety in agriculture is one of the main
concern, especially when handling with farm tools
and machinery. Many accidents in agriculture go

unnoticed because they will not be reported. So
learning from mistakes will be less. Safety tips to
reduce the risk of injuries and fatalities while han-
dling machineries are as follows:

« Safety can be improved on farm by increasing
awareness of farming hazards and making a
conscious effort to prepare for emergency situ-
ations including fires, vehicle accidents, elec-
trical shocks from equipment and wires and
chemical exposures.

« Be especially alert to hazards that may affect
children and the elderly.

« Minimize hazards by carefully selecting the
products to ensure safety.

« Always use seat belts when operating tractors.

¢ Read and follow instructions in equipment op-
erator’s manuals and on product labels.

« Inspect equipment routinely for problems that
may cause accidents.

« Discuss safety hazards and emergency proce-
dures with all concerned.

¢ Take precautions to prevent entrapment and
suffocation caused by unstable surfaces of
grain storage bins and silos. Never “walk on the
grain.”

« Be aware that methane gas, carbon dioxide,
ammonia and hydrogen sulfide can form in un-
ventilated grain silos and manure pits and can
suffocate or poison farmers or explode.

¢ Wear clothing that fits well and is not loose fit-
ting to avoid being caught in pinch points.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Occupational Health and Safety

Never reach over or work near unguarded ro-

tating parts.

Turn off machinery to attend to repairs.
Always replace shields that were removed

for maintenance.

Plug unused or failed borewell pits

Check all equipment for potential w.rap points

(e.g. where clothing or hair could be wrapped

around a shaft) and if possible, shield those

points.

Replace any damaged manufacturer installed

warning labels and place warnings on equip-

ment parts not previously labeled (consider

painting them with a bright color, perhaps with

a wide stripe).

Stay alert and warn others when working with

shear and cutting points (e.g. objects with

blades or hard edges used to cut). Some shear

and cutting points cannot be guarded, which

can result in severe cuts, lost limbs or injuries

from objects thrown by the cutting type equip-

ment.

Wait until a tractor has stopped completely be-

fore stepping into the hitching position.

Never touch free-wheeling parts (i.e. parts that

continue to spin after the power is shut off) un-

til they have stopped moving. This could take

2-2% minutes.

Be aware of burn points: mufflers, manifolds

and even gear cases.

Hydraulic systems contain fluid under extreme

pressure. Before loosening, tightening, remov-

ing or otherwise working with any fittings or

parts, relieve this pressure (shut off the hy-

draulic pump, lower implements and follow

instructions in the operator’s manual).

Keep equipment in good repair and safety fea-

tures up to date.

“Proper machine inspection and maintenance

can help prevent accidents”.

When it comes to machinery maintenance,

a shield and guard to cover spinning parts or

blades should be kept in place.

Follow the one seat, one rider rule. If there is

only one seat on the equipment, there should

only be one rider - an adult.

Dont allow children to play or ride on equip-

ment or in areas where machinery is used or

stored.

Under aged children should not operate 2, 3,

and 4 wheeled vehicles.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

« Do not allow riders or passengers in the back
of pickup trucks.

¢ Before starting machinery, all operators should
know where kids are located. You may be un-
able to hear or see children, especially behind
large wheels or in blind spots.

« All equipment should be parked and locked
with the keys removed when not in use.

¢ Keep hand tools out of reach of children, espe-
cially those with sharp or hot parts.

Better safety and health practices reduce farmer fa-
talities, injuries and illnesses as well as associated
costs such as workers’ compensation insurance
premiums, lost production and medical expenses.
A safer and more healthy workplace improves mo-
rale and productivity.

First aid for accidents: The farmers injured
should be given first aid at the earliest in order to
reduce the damage caused by the injuries. Impor-
tant tips are as follows:

« The treatment should be given from a person
trained in basic first aid, using supplies from a
first-aid kit.

« Medical treatment and care given at the site of
any medical emergency or while transporting
any victim to a medical facility.

« Make sure that first-aid trained personnel are
available to provide quick and effective first-
aid. Alternatively, one of the family members
should be trained.

« Make sure first-aid supplies at your workplace
are appropriate to your occupational setting.
The response time of your emergency medical
services is very important.

« Good knowledge about locally available anti-
dotes or medicinal plants, which can be used.

«Keep the first aid kit(s) in the work place.

¢ Keep clean water in the work place.

« Keep mobile numbers of trained person on
first aid, ambulances, local hospital, local doc-
tors and vehicle owners in the near by vicinity.

5.11. Suggested items for your first-
aid kit

« Sterile adhesive bandages

« Small roll of absorbent cotton pads of different

sizes
« Adhesive tape

Occupational Health and Safety

Triangular and roller bandages

Cotton (1 roll)

Band-aids (Plasters)

Scissors

Pen torch

Latex gloves (2 pair)

Tweezers

Needle

Moistened towels and clean dry cloth pieces.
Antiseptic (Savlon or dettol)

First Aid Kit

Thermometer

Tube of petroleum jelly or other lubricant
Assorted sizes of safety pins

Cleansing agent/soap

Non-prescription drugs

Aspirin or paracetamol pain relievers
Antidiarrhea medication
Antihistamine cream for Bee Stings.
Antacid (for stomach upset)

Laxative

Kits should be checked at least weekly to ensure
adequate number of needed items is available. Kits
may be kept in the work place.

Make sure that first-aid supplies are:

Easily accessible to all farmers.

Stored in containers that protect them from
damage, deterioration or contamination.
Containers must be clearly marked, not locked,
and may be sealed.

Able to be moved to the location of an injured
or acutely ill worker.

Make sure emergency washing facilities are
functional and readily accessible.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture



6. Farmers’ Access to Services

6.1. Objectives of the session

¢ To enhance awareness about source of extension, information and services among farmers.
¢ To expose farmers to public and private extension services.

¢ To encourage farmers to avail extension services through ICT means.

« To enhance farmers knowledge on agricultural credit, insurance and legal aspects.

6.2. What we know at the end of the session

Sources of extension and nature of services provided by following extension service providers:

e Public extension services
e Private extension services
e Institutional sources

e ICT sources

¢ Agricultural credit

¢ Agricultural insurance

« Legal aspects

Farmers’ Access to Services

¢ Information

« Inputs (seed, fertilizer, pesticide, machinery,
etc.)

¢ Infrastructure (cold storage, godown, feed mix-
ing unit, etc.)

¢ Market (market yard, market intelligence,
transport, etc.)

« Developmental schemes/programmes

« Credit and insurance, etc.

The above services are needed with dimensions of
accessibility, quality, cost effectiveness and timeli-
ness.

Information is the critical input required for
the farmers to bring about changes starting
from selection of crops till the marketing.

Past experience: The most important source of in-
formation to the farmers is his/her past experience
itself. However before acting upon information
based on past experience, he/she needs to cross
check the relevance to the present context.

Progressive farmers: are the small segment of rural

life who are socially, economically and technologi-
cally advanced compared to other farmers. They
go in search of advanced technologies proactively,
adopt and harvest the benefit of technologies. They
are the nearest and easiest source of agricultural in-
formation to other farmers. For example, contact
farmers, award winning farmers, Block Farmers
Advisory Committee (BFAC) members, District
Farmers Advisory Committee (DFAC) members,
State Farmers Advisory Committee (SEFAC) mem-
bers, farmers running farm school, etc.

Input Dealers: are mostly village level businessmen
who sell seeds, fertilizers, pesticides and machiner-
ies to the farmers. Also provides extension adviso-
ries by their strength of proximity to the farmers.
However maximum precautions has to be exercised
for accessing the advisory services as they are not
professionally qualified extension functionaries.
However, some input dealers are trained through
various programme like Diploma in Agricultural
Extension Service for Input Dealers (DAESI) who
can provide quality agricultural information. In
other cases, advisory from local public extension
functionaries and inputs based on the advisory
from input dealers can be accessed.

Cooperative Societies: District Central Cooperative


Farmer's Access to Service

banks and Primary Societies

¢ Extend agriculture credits under priority sector
« Implement NABARD schemes

¢ Implement Government schemes

« Implement social security schemes

¢ Extends crop loans

Land (Agriculture & Rural) Development Banks

¢ Extend medium and long term credit to agri-
culture

¢ Implement government schemes

Public sector extension: Represented mainly
by the State Agriculture and allied departments
continues to be the most important source of in-
formation for the majority of farmers. Each depart-
ment such as Agriculture, Horticulture, Sericulture,
Animal Husbandry, Marketing, etc. have their own
extension manpower and delivery mechanism to

reach the farmers. The focus is on transfer of tech-
nology and undertaking agricultural development
programmes of state and central Governments.

Agricultural Technology Management
Agency (ATMA): An agency undertaking ag-
ricultural development programmes at district level
in which agriculture and allied departments along
with private sectors work together. At village level
farmer friend, at block level Block Technology
Manager and Subject Matter Specialists provide
agricultural information and benefits of schemes/
programmes to the farmers. ATMA organize vari-
ous extension activities like field visits, trainings,
demonstrations, field days, farmers - Scientists in-
teractions, exhibitions, exposure visits, campaign,
etc. Publish extension information through print
and electronic media, Provide alerts to farmers on
agriculture operations and precautions.

DAC, MoA, Gol

MANAGE/EEls

State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC)

Inter Departmental Working Group (IDWG)

Commodity Interest Groups of Farmers

(CIGs): A group of farmers growing same crop/
enterprise, share common problems and benefits.
Matured C]Gs can collectively access information,
inputs, infrastructure, credit and market linkages.
Some CIGs have independent setup for research,

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

F SAMETI & SAU/ICAR Sete | State Farmers
u Institutes Nodal cell Advisory Committee
N
D District Training Centre, ATMA District Farmers Advisory
KVK & ZRS (GB & MC) Committee
F P
L ee L
(0) Bloc Block Farmers Advisory A
Block Technology Team = =— —
w ATMA cell Committee N

z2o0s= |

extension, credit and marketing purpose. E.g. Amul
for dairy farmers, Maha Grapes for Grape farmers.

Kisan Call Center (KCC): An online agricul-
tural advisory service provided by Government to
farmers. Farmers can access information on crops,

Farmer's Access to Service

livestock, fisheries, inputs, credit, government
scheme benefits, through toll free number 1800 180
1551 OR 1551 from 6 A.M. to 10 P.M. except on
Sundays and Gazetted holidays. Beyond these hours
the calls are attended in the IVRS mode. Qualified
professional in local language provides the advisory.

Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK): A district sci-
entific organizations that works on technology gen-
eration, refinement and dissemination. KVK con-
sists of qualified multidisciplinary experts focusing
mainly on locally relevant agricultural issues. KVKs
organize front line demonstrations, exposure visits,
training programmes, exhibitions, field days and
provide agricultural literature to the farmers. Some
of the KVKs do provide input support for farmers.

Agriculture university extension system

« Maintains supportive extension service to line
departments.

« Supplements efforts of line departments for ser-
vice through their extension units, research sta-
tions and through teaching campuses.

« Develop innovative extension strategies.

« Provide technical knowledge to line depart-
ments.

« Organize front line demonstration of their
technologies.

« Disseminate technologies through public- pri-
vate partnerships.

Indian Council of Agriculture Research
(ICAR)

« Generates agricultural technologies.

« Provides extension support through its research
institutes and KVKs.

« Develops innovative extension strategies.

« Provides technical knowledge to line depart-
ments.

« Organizes front line demonstration of their
technologies.

« Disseminate technologies through public-pri-
vate partnerships.

Commodity Boards and National Insti-
tutes: Commodity Boards like Coffee Board, Rub-
ber Board, Spice Board, Tea Board, Coconut Devel-
opment Board, Tobacco Board, Silk Board, Cotton
Corporation of India, National institutes like Na-
tional Institute of Agricultural Extension Manage-
ment (MANAGE), Central Food and Technology
Research Institute (CFTRI), Defence Research and
Development Organisation (DRDO), National In-
stitute of Plant Health Management (NIPHM), Na-
tional Institute of Agricultural Marketing (NIAM),
National Horticulture Mission (NHM), National
Horticulture Board (NHB). etc., provide extension
advisory services to their respective clientele group.

International institution: International insti-
tution namely International Center for Research in
Semi Arid and Tropics (ICRISAT) in Hyderabad is
also serving farmers on crops in semiarid and trop-
ics.

Agriclinics and agribusiness centers

¢ Agriclinics and Agribusiness Centers are advi-
sory and business centers managed by agricul-
tural professionals in rural areas.

« They provide client specific advisory services
free/payment basis.

¢ Details on Agripreneurs are available at www.
agriclinics.net.

Agribusiness companies

« Almost all the Agribusiness Companies pro-
vide extension advisory services to farmers in
their specialized crops/inputs.

« Contract farming assures extension, input,
management and market access to farmers by
agribusiness companies. Credit is also provided
in few cases.

« Few agribusiness companies are providing dif-
ferent services to farmers through farmers one
stop shop concept.

Non-Governmental Organisation (NGOs)
Many NGOs are working in various aspects of ag-
ricultural development such as farm advisory, in-
put supply, infrastructures, processing, marketing,
community mobilization, micro finance, livelihood
development, etc. Farmers can take the advantages
of such NGOs wherever available.

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farmer's Access to Service

Mass Media

« Rapidly expanding mass media ensures easy
access to information to farmers on real time
basis.

¢ Agricultural magazines, newspapers provide
updated information on agriculture to farmers
regularly.

« Community radio, radio, and television pro-
vides updated information to the farmers.

¢ Mobile is also widely used as channel for reach-
ing farmers by many organizations.

Internet opens worldwide information to the door-
step of farmers. Some of the important agri portals
useful to the farmers along with key information
available are as follows:

* www.icar.org: Research institutes and major

technologies

* wwwindiaagristat.com: Agricultural related
statistics

* wwwa.isapindia.org: Query Redress Services
(QRS)

* wwwindiaagronet.com: Agricultural jobs,
buy and sell and exhibitions

* wwwagriwatch.com: Market prices of agri-
cultural commodities

* www.indiancommodities.com: Forecasts
of prices of commodities, online trade and
warehousing

¢ \wwwkrishiworld.com: Multilingual portal,
organic farming, crop specific information,
disease and pest, market watch and home
gardening

* wwwagriculture-industry-india.com: Ex-
port - import directory, agro trade leads,
and agro Trade events

* wwwagricoop.nic.in: central sector schemes
and policies

* www.apeda.com: Export and import proce-
dure and schemes

¢ wwweert.nic.in: Fertiliser details

* www.mofpi.nic.in: Food processing tech-
nologies and schemes

* www.agmarknet.nic.in: Prices of commodi-
ties and trends

* wwwicrisat.org: Technologies for semi arid
tropics

« wwwa.ikisan.com: Agro informatics, soft
ware services and education

* www.uttamkrishi.com: Hindi website and
toll free help line

* www.nafed-india.com: Cooperative market-

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture

ing of agricultural produce

* wwwagritech.tnau.ac.in: Technologies, spe-
cial technologies, schemes and services

¢ www.nhm.nic.in: Horticultural technologies
and schemes

6.4. Accessing financial services -
sources

¢ Self Help Groups (Micro Finance Institutions)
« Nationalized and other private banks

« Cooperative banks and societies

« Subsidy schemes of State/Central Governments

Important types of credits and savings

Kisan Credit Card Scheme (KCC) aims at providing
adequate and timely support from the banking sys-
tem to the farmers for their short-term credit needs
for cultivation of crops. This mainly helps farmers
for purchase of inputs during the cropping season.
Credit card scheme proposed to introduce flexibil-
ity to the system and improve cost efficiency.

Benefits of KCC

« Simplifies disbursement procedures.

« Removes rigidity regarding cash and kind.

« No need to apply for a loan for every crop and
every season.

« Assured availability of credit at any time ena-
bling reduced interest burden for the farmer.

+ Helps to buy seeds, fertilizers at farmer’s con-
venience and choice.

« Helps to buy on cash-avail discount from deal-
ers.

. Credit facility for 3 years - no need for sea-
sonal appraisal.

« Maximum credit limit based on agriculture in-
come.

« Any number of withdrawals permitted subject
to credit limit.

« Repayment only after harvest.

« Rate of interest as applicable to agriculture ad-
vance.

« Security, margin and documentation norms as
applicable to agricultural advance.

How to get Kisan credit cards

« Approach nearest public sector bank and get
the details.

« Eligible farmers will get a Kisan Credit Card
and a passbook. It contains details like name,

Farmer's Access to Service

address, particulars of land holding, borrow-
ing limit, validity period, a passport size pho-
tograph of holder which may serve both as an
identity card and facilitate recording of transac-
tions on an ongoing basis.

« Borrower is required to produce the card cum
pass book whenever he/she operates the ac-
count.

Banks implementing KCC

e Allahabad Bank - Kisan Credit Card (KCC)

e Andhra Bank - AB Kisan Green Card

¢ Bank of Baroda - BKCC

¢ Bank of India - Kisan Samadhan Card

e Canara Bank - KCC

« Corporation Bank - KCC

e Dena Bank - Kisan Gold Credit Card

e Oriental Bank of Commerce -Oriental Green
Card (OGC)

« Punjab National bank - PNB Krishi Card

« State Bank of Hyderabad -KCC

e State Bank of India -KCC

« Syndicate Bank -SKCC

¢ Vijaya Bank -Vijaya Kisan Card

« Personal Accident Insurance Package” is pro-
vided to the Kisan Credit Card (KCC) holders.

Salient features of the scheme

« This scheme covers all the Kisan Credit Card
Holders against death or permanent disability
within the country.

« All KCC holders up to the age of 70 years are
eligible.

The benefits under the scheme are as un-
der

« Death due to accident caused by outward, vio-
lent and visible means: Rs.50,000/-

« Permanent total disability: Rs.50,000/-

« Loss of two limbs or two eyes or one limb and
one eye: Rs.50,000/-

« Loss of one limb or one eye: Rs.25,000/-

« Period of Master Policy - Valid for a period of
3 years.

¢ Period of Insurance - Insurance cover will be
in force for a period of one year from the date
of receipt of premium from the participating
Banks in cases where annual premium is paid.
In case of three year cover, the period of insur-
ance would be for three years from the date of
receipt of premium.

e Premium - Out of the Annual premium of

Rs.15/- per KCC holder, Bank has to pay
Rs.10/- and Rs.5/- has to be recovered from
KCC holder.

¢ Claims Procedure - In case of death, disable-
ment claims & death due to drowning: Claim
administration will be done by the designated
office of the Insurance Companies. Separate
procedure is to be followed.

Credit support from nationalized
banks

« Extend agriculture credits under priority sec-
tor, implement NABARD Schemes, Govern-
ment schemes and social security schemes

¢ Extend crop and agriculture investment/term
loans

Extension of Bank-SHG Linkage Pro-

gramme to Agricultural Purposes

¢ The loans extended under both the SHG link-
age programme and Primary Agriculture Co -
operative Societies (PACS) originate from joint
efforts of people and financial institutions.

¢ The microfinance (through SHGs- Bank link-
age) meets both consumption and production
needs of the people compared to the conven-
tional system that caters only to the produc-
tion needs.

Commodity Boards Finance

« Give crop loans and subsidies
« Crop pledge loan
¢ Market loan

6.5. Agricultural insurance

nsurance coverage is given to farmers mainly by

Agricultural Insurance Corporation Ltd (AIC)
and many other private agencies. All loanee farm-
ers automatically eligible for agricultural insurance
coverage. Non loanee farmers can also avail this
benefit by payment of nominal premium. Some of
the important agricultural insurance schemes avail-
able at present are as follows.

¢ National Agricultural Insurance Scheme

« WBCIS - Weather Based Crop Insurance
Scheme

« MNAIS - Modified National Agricultural In-
surance Scheme

e RISC - Rainfall Insurance Scheme for Coffee

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


(Coffee Insurance)
¢ Rubber Insurance
e Coconut Insurance
e Varsha Bima/Rainfall Insurance
¢ Rabi Weather Insurance
« Wheat Insurance (Weather & Biomass)
e Potato Insurance
¢ Bio-Fuel Tree/Plant Insurance
¢ Pulpwood Tree Insurance
¢« Cardamom Plant & Yield Insurance

l is important for farmers to know the legal as-
pects of important inputs namely seeds, fertiliz-
ers, pesticides, etc.

The Seeds Act 1966 deals with regulations re-
lated to production, certification, quality control,
sales, seed analysis, seed inspection, export and
import, penalty, exemptions and amendment. The
details are available under http://agricoop.nic.in/
seedsact.htm

The Fertiliser (Control) order 1985 deals
with regulations related to fertilizer Price control,
control on distribution, registration of dealers,
manufacture of fertilizers, mixtures, restrictions on
manufacturing, import, sale, enforcement authori-
ties, analysis of samples, specifications and penalty.
The details are available under www.agricoop.nic.in/
sublegi/FertilizerControlOrder.htm

Insecticides Act, 1968: An act to regulate the
import, manufacture, sale, transport, distribution
and use of insecticides with a view to prevent risk
to human beings or animals and for matters con-
nected. The details are available under http://cibre.
nic.in/insecticides_act.htm

For more information, farmers may contact nearest
banks, agricultural department or Kisan Call Cent-
ers.

1.

5.12. Lessons Learnt

Important extension sources to farmers are
progressive farmers, input dealers, Coop-
erative Society, ATMA, Kissan Call Center
(Toll Free No. 1800 180 1551), Krishi Vi-
gyan Kendra, Agricultural Universities,
ICAR Institutions, Commodity Boards,
National Institutes, Interantional Insti-
tutes, Agriclinics and Agribusiness Cent-
ers, NGOs, Radio, TV, Newspapers, Agri-
cultural Magazines and agricultural related
websites.

Important sources of finance to farmers
are banks, cooperatives and SHGs.

Kissan Credit Cards provides adequate and
timely financial support from the banking
system to the farmers.

Non loanee farmers are advised to take the
benefits of agricultural insurance cover-
age by paying nominal premium, maintain
close liaison with extension, credit and in-
surance providers regularly.

Farmer's Access to Service

WORKSHEET

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farmer's Access to Service

WORKSHEET

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farmer's Access to Service

WORKSHEET

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farmer's Access to Service

WORKSHEET

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farmer's Access to Service

WORKSHEET

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farmer's Access to Service

WORKSHEET

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farmer's Access to Service

WORKSHEET

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture


Farmer's Access to Service

WORKSHEET

Farmer’s Handbook on Basic Agriculture



For further information,
contact:

Dr. P. Chandra Shekara

National Institute of Agricultural
Extension Management
(MANAGE)

Ministry of Agriculture
Government of India
Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh
India

Mrs. Sabine Preuss

Programme Director

Natural Resource Management
Deutsche Gesellschaft fiir
Internationale Zusammenarbeit
(GIZ) GmbH

A2/18, Safdurjung Enclave

2nd floor, New Delhi - 110029
India

Mr. Rajiv Ahuja

Technical Expert

Natural Resource Management
Programme

Deutsche Gesellschaft fiir
Internationale Zusammenarbeit
(GIZ) GmbH

A2/18 Safdurjung Enclave

2nd floor, New Delhi, 110029
India

D B S Al WK. develoPPP.de

i] eee
aan =

| FRUITS & VEGE


