The One-Straw Revolution


Masanobu Fukuoka

The One-Straw
Revolution

An Introduction to Natural Farming

With a Preface by Partap Aggarwal
Edited by Larry Korn

Other India Press
Mapusa, Goa, India

The One-Straw Revolution

by Masanobu Fukuoka

Translated from the Japanese by Chris Pearce, Tsune Kurosawa and Larry Korn
Originally published in Japan as Shizen Noho Wara Ippon No Kakumei

Published by:
Other India Press
Mapusa 403 507, Goa, India

First OIP edition: 1992
Eighth impression: 2001
Copyright (c) 1978 by Rodale Press, Inc., and Masanobu Fukuoka

Photo and Illustration Credits:

The photos on pages 43, 45, 57 and 62 are © Copyright 1978

by Masanobu Fukuoka

Photographs on the following pages are © Copyright 1977, 1978

by Howard Harrison: 2, 16, 35, 42, 50, 55, 73, 93, 101, 107, 112, 125, 140, 152, 158, 169 and 174.
The photograph on page 46 is © Copyright 1978 by Tomas Nelissen.

The front cover has been designed by Orijit Sen.

OIP policy regarding environmental compensation:

A sum of 25% of the cost of the paper used for this book will be made available by the Other India Press to meet the costs of
raising natural forests on private and community lands in order to compensate for the partial use of tree pulp in paper
production.

Distributed in India by:

Other India Bookstore

Above Mapusa Clinic

Mapusa 403 507, Goa, India.

Phone: 91-832-263306; 256479 Fax: 91-832-263305
e-mail: oib@goatelecom.com

ISBN No: 81-85569-3 1-2

Printed by Sujit Patwardhan for the Other India Press at
Mudra, 383, Narayan Peth, Pune 411 030 India.

Contents

Preface by Partap Aggarwal ............ 0c cececee cee ee cee eeeee een eenen eee ix
Introduction by Larry Korn 20.0.0... cece cece cee cee eee eeenee ee nen eee ee Xx1
Translator’s Notes .............ccccceeceeeceeee eee eeeeeeeeen een eeaeeaeenes XXXiii
I

Look at this Grain 1.0.0... ccc cece cece eee e cece eee eeeeee eee eee eee een eee 1
Nothing at All 0.0... e ener ee eee teense een ea een ee ee ene 4
Returning to the Country ............. ccc cec cece cence eee eee eee eee eee een ees 11
Toward a Do-Nothing Farming ...........0....c cece eee ee eee ee eee eee ee een ees 15
Returning to the Source .............ccccec cece cece eee eeeeee eee eeneeseeenes 19
One Reason Natural Farming Has Not Spread ................00c cess sesso 22
Humanity Does Not Know Nature ..............ccceee cee eeeee nee ee eee eeeees 25
II

Four Principles of Natural Farming...............0..ccceecee eee ee eee ee eens 33
Farming Among the Weeds ............... 0c ccceeceeceenee tence eeeeneeneneeees 41
Farming with Straw .............cccccceecee cece eee eeeeee eee eeeeee eee eeneenees 47
Growing Rice in a Dry Field 0.2.0.0... 00. coc cece cec cece eee ee eee eee ee nee 53
Orchard Trees.......... 00. ccc cece cec eee eeeeec eee eee eee eee eee eee een eee eeaeenes 58
Orchard Earth 1.0.0... ...0c. ccc cce cece cece eee ee cess eee senses eee een eee eea eee enas 61
Growing Vegetables like Wild Plants .................cccccseeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 65
The Terms for Abandoning Chemicals .. 70
Limits of the Scientific Method .................ccc ccc ece eee eee eee een eene es 74
Il

One Farmer Speaks Out ..............00ccce cece eee eee eee eee eee een eee een eens 79
A Modest Solution to a Difficult Problem ..................ccseceeeeee eens 82
The Fruit of Hard Times ............. 00. ccc ccec cece eee eee eee scenes eeeeeeaeenes 85
The Marketing of Natural Food .. 89
Commercial Agriculture Will Fail ..............0. ccc ccc eecceec nescence ees 92
Research for Whose Benefit .................ceccece scence eee eee eee eeee een ees 96
What is Human Food? ........... 00. ccc cece eee eee eee eee see eee eee eeeeeeeeeees 99
A Merciful Death for Barley 1.0.0.0... cece cece eee eene eee eeeens 105
Simply Serve Nature and All is Well ..............ccc cee ceec cece eee eee eens 110
Various Schools of Natural Farming ...............::ccccceceee eee eee eeeee 115
IV

Confusion About Food ..............cccceecee cece eee eee eee eee eee eee eeeeenes 123
Nature’s Food Mandala .................cccceeeeeseeee scence ees 127
The Culture of Food 2.0.0.0... 00 ccc cece e cece eee eee eee eee een eee eeneeeeeees 134
Living by Bread Alone ........... cece ee cee ce eee cee een ee een ee een ee een eneee 139
Summing up Diet ...........0 cece cece eee c cece eee ee eee eee eee eee eee een eee 142

Food and Farming .............. 0c cee cecec cee ee eee eee tence ee eeneeeeeeeenenees 147

Vv

Foolishness Comes out Looking Smart ................0.:0cceeeeeeeeee eens

Who is the Fool? ............

I Was Born to Go to Nursery School .............0.00cceeceeeeee eee eee eees

Drifting Clouds and the Illusion of Science

The Theory of Relativity ..

A Village Without War and Peace ............. cece cee ee eee ee een ecees

The One-Straw Revolution

151
156
160
164
169
172
178

This translation has been a communal effort

by the student workers on the mountain.


Preface

I first learned of Fukuoka's One-Straw Revolution through a book-review in an American magazine, Mother
Earth News, about the end of 1983. Although short, the review was soaked in the magic and power of this
remarkable little book. It aroused in me an irresistible desire to read it. But living at the Friends Rural Centre,
Rasulia, I was nowhere near a bookstore.

So I wrote to a friend in London. She responded immediately but sent the book by ordinary mail. Realizing
that transit time might take as long as six months, I requested another friend to airmail a copy. That came fairly
quickly.

I can never forget how, on receiving the book from the postman, I settled down under a secluded tree and
read till it became too dark to see. I was lucky our house did not catch fire that afternoon, for I might not have
stirred to put it out! Needless to say I had finished reading the book before going to bed. Next morning I talked
of nothing except the book. By the evening I had persuaded several friends to assemble for a joint reading of my
discovery. We finished the entire volume in six evening sessions. Everyone felt rewarded. The book touched our
hearts.

We began sharing the book with our visitors and noticed a 100 per cent positive response. I began to dream

of publishing the book in India.

Fortunately for us our printer friend from Pune, Sujit Patwardhan, came to visit us with his family. Sujit
noticed my enthusiasm for the book and agreed to prepare an estimate for reprinting it. Aware of our constraints
he tailored his calculations with heavy concessions and somehow made the project do-able. I am certain it would
not have come through without his generous help which included an offer to assist in selling the finished
product.

Sujit's calculations showed that it was possible to produce a presentable paperback edition at an affordable
sale price. No profit of course would be made by the Friends Rural Centre, and all the work of handling, packing
and mailing would have to be done free of charge by volunteers. With all this clearly understood, I accepted the
challenge.

Rodale Press possessed the book's copyright. I wrote and obtained their permission to print an Indian edition
for a nominal royalty.

We printed 1000 copies and sold all in less than four months! By December 1987, when I left Rasulia, we
had already run four editions and sold more than 3500 copies.

In the meanwhile, I had opportunities to get to know Fukuoka Sensei as well as Robert Rodale personally.
They both gave permission to encourage translation of the book into various Indian languages. Thus, a
Malayalam translation was released in 1986, and by now the book is available in Marathi, Gujarati, Telugu,
Bengali and probably also Hindi.

Knowing that the original English version is still in demand I am happy to participate in making it again
available under the aegis of the Other India Press. The appearance of this new edition gives me an opportunity
to share with readers my own experience with natural

farming and natural living for which

part of the impetus came from Fukuoka Sensei's One-Straw Revolution.

I wish to make it clear that it is not my habit to fuss over books in this manner. On the contrary, I tend to be
skeptical, for in my opinion most books are insufferably dull, belaboured, and far too long. Good books are rare.
Once in a long while, however, a truly inspiring book comes along. One-Straw Revolution is undoubtedly one of
those.

I am also quite aware that even the best of books cannot possibly inspire all their readers; much depends on
the reader's mind and mood. My colleagues and I happened to be ready for Fukuoka. We had been
experimenting with sustainable and healthy agriculture since 1978. I had come to work at Rasulia with this as
part of my concern. We did not label our particular approach at that time because we wished to remain open for
a complete transformation in our ways of thinking. I for one had grown increasingly uncomfortable with most of
what I had been taught.

At Rasulia we had no human mentor or creed. We regarded Nature as our guru. To grow, we tried to learn to
hear and observe Nature. We believed that seeking the truth collectively as a community would keep us on the
right track and open all doors for us. There were about 20 persons in our group: men and women, young and old,
illiterate and highly schooled, mostly very poor people hailing from rural villages. Together we had begun to
ponder over the ways in which we did things, particularly agriculture. All of us were skeptical and ready to
change.

Entirely through trial and error, in four years, we had achieved the following. The use of chemical fertilizers
and pesticides was totally banned on our land. This was by no means an easy decision for a farm where earlier

large doses of chemical fertilizers had been applied to Mexican dwarf wheat to produce

maximum per acre yields. But the ban was honestly observed despite setbacks. After many mistakes our
production had stabilized and organic matter fully replaced chemicals.

To guard ourselves against crop failure we had diversified our cropping pattern, adopting time tested ideas
used by traditional farmers of the area. Since we were no longer using pesticides we had learned many simple
plant protection techniques. For instance, we used known insect repellants such as garlic, onions, neem,
marigold and many other flowering plants. Different plants in our fields attracted different insects who kept
each other in check. In some cases they repelled each other's enemies.

By all this we had soon achieved a livable balance and our crops were reasonably healthy. We had learned
to favour only hardy, local, natural seeds. In two little garden plots we had tried mulching with straw. The effect
had been highly beneficial. The insect population in the soil had increased, the soil had become softer and
healthier, retaining a greater amount of moisture for a longer period of time. A variety of other little changes had
been made in our agriculture and accepted as old habits.

We had a nagging feeling, however, of having reached a plateau. The need for a new direction was being
strongly felt in our community when One Straw Revolution came to us. In it we found just what we were
looking for. Most of our friends agreed that we needed to adopt Natural Farming wholeheartedly with all its
promise and risks. After all most of what was suggested in the book had already been adopted. No-digging was
the only major new idea.

However we soon discovered that no-digging is the hardest part of natural farming! Farmers who have

always ploughed before planting and have never

even dreamed of questioning this practice, cannot easily imagine placing seeds in 'unprepared' soil. Therefore,
we dared not stop ploughing on all of our land. But our people agreed on a drastic reduction in the use of the
plough. We also replaced the mould board implement with the shallow blade one called bakhar. To enforce
discipline and reduce costs we sold our tractor and one out of three pairs of bullocks we owned as well. We had
burned a bridge and its psychological impact was enormous. Most of our friends thought we were now going too
far.

After much debate our community agreed to devote a 4-acre plot for no-till experiments. The land was
highly depleted but centrally located. Because of its visibility it was suitable for the experiment. Two years
later, in view of its clear success, this area was doubled. As our fame spread, we began to receive a steady
stream of visitors. Their comments, suggestions and enthusiasm became a source of encouragement for our
community.

As we practised natural farming we learned many interesting new things. One day, on the occasion of the
Rishi Panchmi festival, I noticed that women who observed a fast on that day broke it by consuming wild foods
gathered from uncultivated soil. A perusal of the Sanskrit literature revealed that this festival dated back to
ancient times when many rishis grew their entire food without ploughing. They considered food grown in this
manner to be healthier. Also they believed ploughing to be harmful to the soil. In fact, Manu discusses this in his
famous Manusmriti and asserts that deeper the digging, the more harmful it is for the soil. Thus natural farming
was not a new idea entirely.

Similar farming practices have also been found to exist in different parts of the world. For instance, all over

North America, Indians planted corn, beans,

squashes and other vegetable by dibbling. They did not even possess the plough. No wonder the Europeans
found the soil rich and healthy even after 50,000 years of use by the Indians. Elsewhere on the same continent,
where more civilized tribes used the plough, the soil had turned to sand.

In order to emphasize the long history and world spread of natural farming, I began to call it rishi kheti. I
also hoped that this would prevent it from being called Japanese kheti. Later, when I told Fukuoka this, he
heartily endorsed rishi kheti. He said if Gandhiji were alive he would also have blessed rishi kheti.

As readers will soon discover, this book is not only about agriculture. It is concerned with the total lifestyle.
Hence it devotes considerable attention to nutrition, health, science and technology and to simple living. More
than all this Fukuoka emphasizes the spiritual underpinnings of his idea.

He shares his personal spiritual experience of being one day shaken to the core by a realization that all the
world was part of one central truth. We see duality and opposites because of ignorance. Therefore all our
knowledge based on observation of phenomena is really false and therefore virtually useless. It is mainly to
illustrate this insight that Fukuoka turned to farming. Step by step he abandoned ‘necessary’ tasks carried out by
farmers and recommended by ‘experts’. In the end he produced just as good crops without digging, weeding,
composting, and without using chemical fertilizers and pesticides. He thus proved that all our conventional
knowledge of agriculture is not only worthless, but actually harmful because it has hurt the soil, weakened the
plants and poisoned the environment.

Fukuoka describes his farming experiments in just enough detail to be convincing and to be useful

as a guide to actual gardeners. The book hops along in a most delightful way from discussing techniques of
pelletizing seeds to ideas about right food and health and from modern science to Zen. It does not read like a
book of words. Words seem to merge into pictures, and blend again into a whole, leaving the reader with a
delightful vision.

At Rasulia, my friends and I were also trying to find a whole new way of life which would bring us in
harmony with the environment, life, people, ourselves. Agriculture was only a part within the whole. We had
therefore no difficulty relating with either Fukuoka's ideas of unity of all things, or with his philosophy of
do-nothing.

Of course we understood these ideas in our own way. Fukuoka reaffirmed our view to our great joy and
satisfaction. In fact we too saw revolution in a straw. We did believe that if only a fraction of ordinary Indian
farmers could adopt rishi kheti they could bring down the agro-business establishment, the government, and
with it the entire urban-industrial structures in the country. Perhaps the straw had the same kind of power as
Gandhi's charkha.

Let me finally discuss one very important point before leaving the reader to turn to his enjoyment of this
book. People often ask, will Fukuoka's natural farming work in India? If we try to do exactly what Fukuoka did
in Japan, then the answer is No. Even in such a small country as Japan, farmers in different parts must choose
different techniques. It is absurd to think of doing in India what Fukuoka does in Shikoku.

But the idea of natural farming itself has universal validity if understood in its true sense of allowing nature
to farm with little or no human intervention. Plants are raised by mother nature, not by humans. And mother

nature has all necessary knowledge and

all needed resources to grow plants. Human beings should watch closely and the little they do should be done

with great caution.

In this sense, where on earth can rishi kheti not be practised? India is in fact a far better place than Japan to
practise natural farming for two major reasons: one, we have a longer growing season and, two, a larger variety

of flora and fauna. During his visit to Rasulia in 1987, Fukuoka too agreed.

We practised rishi kheti at Rasulia for about eight years. I can state with full confidence that the community

gained in every conceivable way. Let me first talk of the financial and material benefits.

From day one our net gain from agriculture began to expand. In three years, our farm became a healthy
producer of surplus and our net income continued to improve till 1987 when I left. As an institution, Friends
Rural Centre became financially self-reliant for the first time in a hundred years. We stopped taking money from

QPS in London which had been the Centre's benefactor every single year since its inception.

All this is fairly easy to explain. Our input costs had gone down while productivity had remained relatively
high. By not using chemical fertilizers and by selling the tractor we made a saving of at least Rs. 50,000 per
year. Our labour costs were less than before. Self-reliance in cattle feed saved us considerable amount of money.
Open grazing of cattle improved their health, thereby reducing our costs on veterinary care. Much expenditure
was saved on seed and implements. Our total production of grains and milk remained more or less constant, but

the money realised from their sale was higher.

All this was, of course, not easily achieved. There were many big and small failures, criticisms, and much

strain. For instance, when we abruptly stopped

fertilizer use, our wheat yields plummeted. Knowing that Mexican dwarf wheats are addicted to chemical
fertilizers we had anticipated trouble and had planted only a small acreage under this crop. Later, with great
difficulty, we found hardy local wheat varieties and were able to grow small quantities for our own use. We
even grew ragi, rye and triticale quite successfully. Everyone in the community enjoyed these delicious grains.
We stopped growing wheat for the market. In its place we increased our production of clover seed, soyabean,
lentils and other crops. Because of its ready market and high price, clover seed fetched us good money. Being a

legume it toned up our soil as a bonus.

Rice turned out to be our real saviour. I can never forget our experience with it. Our first rice crop without
fertilizer was about 20 days old. Bala, our farm leader, asked me to come with him to the field. Pointing to light
green rice plants he told me, "They are asking for fertilizer." Indeed they were cursing me, the new city slicker
who knew nothing about agriculture. Luckily the community stuck to its decision against fertilizer use. And
luckily also, the rice plants began to fend for themselves and recovered. The only help we gave was extra doses
of slurry and raw cowdung mixed with irrigation water.

Rice adapted beautifully to natural farming at Rasulia. The change could be seen in the size, shape, colour,
and smell of the seed. Our yields improved every year and we were harvesting upto 20 quintals of rice per acre
on some plots. Our overall yields were highest in the area. Farmers from near and far now came to look at our
crops. Many of them could not believe that we did not use any fertilizers. Some tried to check privately from our

workers to find out whether we were cheating.

Invariably our peasant visitors were puzzled about our opposition to ploughing. I would dig up some soil
and show them how many more insects and worms we had. Farmers had no difficulty understanding that those
were our ploughmen. I used to ask them, with so many millions of tireless ploughmen in the soil, where was the
need for us to plough? Some observant visitors used to point to weeds, cobwebs, frogs, algae, and other signs of
untidiness in our fields. I used to tell them that if they compared their own crop with ours they would find our
input costs lower and yields much higher. The choice was theirs. This muted most of them.

A geneticist friend, Dr. R.H. Richharia, explained the mystery of our success with rice. He pointed out that
since central India is the home of the rice plant, it is comfortable here and adapts easily to any change in
growing conditions. He told us that there were probably 40,000 Varieties of rice in a 200 mile wide belt from
Surat to Cuttack. Of these, 20,000 were collected and catalogued in a government seed bank with which he was
associated all his life. The high yielding varieties we were growing happened not to be too badly damaged by
engineering. They still had the genetic potential to develop a suitable root structure to feed on organic matter.
That is why our rice stopped asking for fertilizer on finding the foolish newcomer to the community obstinate.

In the course of our experiments at Rasulia we learned many other interesting things. A couple of examples
will give the reader a hint of the kinds of things nature revealed to us.

All over the world, among civilized people, 'weeds' are regarded as enemies. Enormous amounts of energy
are spent to eliminate them. Weeding is regarded as the most tedious task in agriculture and also perhaps the

most beneficial. People want to see

bare and 'clean' earth under their crops. They think, if the ground is bare, their vegetables will get all the
nutrition from the soil without competition from weeds.

One of the lessons we learned at Rasulia was that the popular beliefs about weeds are false and we should
think of weeds as friends, not enemies. When the earth is dug up and exposed to rain, sun and wind it begins to
erode. Then, nature's most effective tool to check erosion is a mulch of dead leaves or living plants. It has been
found that one reason weeds come so persistently to cultivated lands is because they are cultivated. As soon as
we stop cultivation weeds become redundant and lose vigour.

At Rasulia we found that all crops benefitted from a ground cover whether it were made of straw, leaves or
the right types of living plants. Often, the so-called weeds in fact feed their hosts by fixing nitrogen in nodules
on their roots. They soften and aerate the soil; often they also repel harmful insects. We collected seeds of
suitable weeds and planted them with our crops to provide ground cover. Wherever I go I advise people to
mulch their vegetable and flower plots. If people learn this simple useful habit they can save themselves
enormous amount of labour. Huge amounts of organic material will be recycled. Piles of 'garbage' will
disappear. 'Vegetable production will increase. Soil will become healthier. Even flowers will be prettier.

Domesticated food plants lose their natural vigor. To continue to survive, they require human intervention in
the form of ploughing and weeding. That is why farmers start by ploughing their fields. But there are many other
ways to plant and raise a crop. One that we found very effective was to take advantage of hardy leguminous

plants such as clover, tur, and soyabeans.

We would broadcast clover seed in an uncultivated field in November. Clover will grow amidst any weeds if
the ground is wet and weather cool. When the clover was six to eight inches high, we would cut the field clean.
Clover likes to be cut and most other weeds don't. After the third cutting, all the other weeds would have gone,
only clover would be remaining. In late April when the weather turned hot, the clover would quickly go to seed
which could be gathered towards the end of May. Cut clover is excellent cattle feed and clover seed has a good
market.

At Rasulia clover became our most lucrative crop. In the same field in which we used to plant rice in July,
sometime in November, about two weeks before rice harvesting time, we would plant clover in the standing
paddy. In some of our fields we carried out this rotation for 4 years. Our crops were excellent and our soil
improved. We returned most of the straw and the cowdung back to the soil.

Tur too can be similarly used to clear a field of weeds. Tur seeds may be dibbled manually, say, three feet
apart. When the plants are eighteen to twenty inches high, cut and drop the weeds. Repeat this a month or so
later. By then tur is well established and able to shade everything else out.

I must conclude with a word of caution. What worked at Rasulia may or may not work elsewhere because
soils and environments vary widely. Farmers everywhere must do their own research by closely watching and
listening to nature. Natural farming teaches us to become receptive to nature's wisdom which is generously
offered to us all the time through plants, animals and soil.

Partap C. Aggarwal

Introduction

Near a small village on the island of Shikoku in southern Japan, Masanobu Fukuoka has been developing a
method of natural farming which could help to reverse the degenerative momentum of modern agriculture.
Natural farming requires no machines, no chemicals, and very little weeding. Mr. Fukuoka does not plow the
soil or use prepared compost. He does not hold water in his rice fields throughout the growing season as farmers
have done for centuries in the Orient and around the world. The soil of his fields has been left unplowed for
over twenty-five years, yet their yields compare favorably with those of the most productive Japanese farms. His
method of farming requires less labor than any other. It creates no pollution and does not require the use of
fossil fuels.

When I first heard stories about Mr. Fukuoka, I was skeptical. How could it be possible to grow
high-yielding crops of rice and winter grains each year simply by scattering seed onto the surface of an
unplowed field? There had to be more to it than that.

For several years I had been living with a group of friends on a farm in the mountains north of Kyoto. We
used the traditional methods of Japanese agriculture to grow rice, rye, barley, soybeans, and various garden

vegetables. Visitors to our farm often spoke of the work of Mr. Fukuoka. None of these people had

stayed long enough at his farm to learn the details of his technique, but their talk excited my curiosity.

Whenever there was a lull in our work schedule, I travelled to other parts of the country, stopping at farms
and communes, working part-time along the way. On one of these excursions I paid a visit to Mr. Fukuoka's
farm to learn about this man's work for myself.

I am not quite sure what I expected him to be like, but after having heard so much about this great teacher, I
was somewhat surprised to see that he was dressed in the boots and the work clothes of the average Japanese
farmer. Yet his white wispy beard and alert, self-assured manner gave him the presence of a most unusual
person.

I stayed at Mr. Fukuoka's farm for several months on that first visit, working in the fields and in the citrus
orchard. There, and in the mudwalled huts in evening discussions with other student farmworkers, the details of
Mr. Fukuoka's method and its underlying philosophy gradually became clear to me.

Mr. Fukuoka's orchard is located on the hillsides overlooking Matsuyama Bay. This is "the mountain" where
his students live and work. Most of them arrive as I did, with a knapsack on their backs, not knowing what to
expect. They stay for a few days or a few weeks, and disappear down the mountain again. But there is usually a
core group of four or five who have been there for a year or so. Over the years many people, both women and
men, have come to stay and work.

There are no modern conveniences. Drinking water is carried in buckets from the spring, meals are cooked
at a wood-burning fireplace, and light is provided by candles and kerosene lamps. The mountain is rich with

wild herbs and vegetables. Fish and shell-fish

can be gathered in nearby streams, and sea vegetables from the Inland Sea a few miles away.

Jobs vary with the weather and the season. The workday begins at about eight; there is an hour for lunch
(two or three hours during the heat of midsummer); the students return to the huts from their work just before
dusk. Besides the agricultural jobs, there are the daily chores of carrying water, cutting firewood, cooking,
preparing the hot bath, taking care of the goats, feeding the chickens and collecting their eggs, minding the bee
hives, repairing and occasionally constructing new huts, and preparing miso (soybean paste) and tofu (soybean
curd).

Mr. Fukuoka provides 10,000 yen (about $35) a month for the living expenses of the whole community.
Most of it is used to buy soy sauce, vegetable oil, and other necessities which are impractical to produce on a
small scale. For the rest of their needs, the students must rely entirely on the crops they grow, the resources of
the area, and on their own ingenuity. Mr. Fukuoka purposely has his students live in this semi-primitive manner,
as he himself has lived for many years, because he believes that this way of life develops the sensitivity
necessary to farm by his natural method.

In the area of Shikoku where Mr. Fukuoka lives, rice is grown on the coastal plains and citrus on the
surrounding hillsides. Mr. Fukuoka's farm consists of one and a quarter acres of rice fields and twelve and a half
acres of mandarin orange orchards. This may not seem like much to a Western farmer, but because all the work
is done with the traditional Japanese hand tools, it requires a lot of labor to maintain even so small an acreage.

Mr. Fukuoka works with the students in the fields and in the orchard, but no one knows exactly when he

will visit the job site. He seems to have a

knack for appearing at times when the students least expect him. He is an energetic man, always chattering
about one thing or another. Sometimes he calls the students together to discuss the work they are doing, often
pointing out ways in which the job could be accomplished more easily and quickly At other times he talks about
the life cycle of a weed or disease fungus in the orchard, and occasionally he pauses to recall and reflect upon
his farming experiences. Besides explaining his techniques, Mr. Fukuoka also teaches the fundamental skills of
agriculture. He emphasizes the importance of caring properly for tools and never tires of demonstrating their
usefulness.

If the newcomer expected "natural farming" to mean that nature would farm while he sat and watched, Mr.
Fukuoka soon taught him that there was a great deal he had to know and do. Strictly speaking, the only
"natural" farming is hunting and gathering. Raising agricultural crops is a cultural innovation which requires
knowledge and persistent effort. The fundamental distinction is that Mr. Fukuoka farms by cooperating with
nature rather than trying to "improve" upon nature by conquest.

Many visitors come to spend only an afternoon, and Mr. Fukuoka patiently shows them around his farm. It
is not uncommon to see him striding up the mountain path with a group of ten or fifteen visitors puffing behind.
There have not always been so many visitors, however. For years, while he was developing his method, Mr.
Fukuoka had little contact with anyone outside his village.

As a young man, Mr. Fukuoka left his rural home and travelled to Yokohama to pursue a career as a
microbiologist. He became a specialist in plant diseases and worked for some years in a laboratory as an

agricultural customs inspector. It was at that time, while still a young man of twenty-five, that Mr. Fukuoka

experienced the realization which was to form the basis of his life's work and which was to be the theme of this
book, The One-Straw Revolution. He left his job and returned to his native village to test the soundness of his
ideas by applying them in his own fields.

The basic idea came to him one day as he happened to pass an old field which had been left unused and
unplowed for many years. There he saw healthy rice seedlings sprouting through a tangle of grasses and weeds.
From that time on, he stopped flooding his field in order to grow rice. He stopped sowing rice seed in the spring
and, instead, put the seed out in the autumn, sowing it directly onto the surface of the field when it would
naturally have fallen to the ground. Instead of plowing the soil to get rid of weeds, he learned to control them by
a more or less permanent ground cover of white clover and a mulch of rice and barley straw. Once he has seen to
it that conditions have been tilted in favor of his crops, Mr. Fukuoka interferes as little as possible with the plant
and animal communities in his fields.

Since many Westerners, even farmers, are not familiar with the rotation of rice and winter grain, and
because Mr. Fukuoka makes many references to rice-growing in The One-Straw Revolution, it may be helpful to
say a few words about traditional Japanese agriculture.

Originally rice seed was cast directly onto the flooded river plain during the monsoon season. Eventually the
bottomlands were terraced to hold irrigation water even after the seasonal flooding had subsided.

By the traditional method, used in Japan until the end of the Second World War, rice seed is sown onto a

carefully prepared starter bed. Compost and manure

are distributed over the field, which is then flooded and plowed to a pea-soup consistency. When the seedlings
are about eight inches tall, they are transplanted by hand to the field. Working steadily, an experienced farmer
can transplant about one-third of an acre in a day, but the job is almost always done by many people working
together.

Once the rice has been transplanted, the field is lightly cultivated between the rows. It is then hand-weeded,
and often mulched. For three months the field stays flooded, the water standing an inch or more above the
surface of the ground. Harvesting is done with a hand sickle. The rice is bundled and hung on wooden or
bamboo racks for a few weeks to dry before threshing. From transplanting to harvest, every inch of the field is
gone over at least four times by hand.

As soon as the rice harvest is completed, the field is plowed and the soil is shaped into flattened ridges
about a foot wide divided by drainage furrows. The seeds of rye or barley are scattered on' top of the hills and
covered with soil. This rotation was made possible by a well-timed planting schedule and care to keep the fields
well supplied with organic matter and essential nutrients. It is remarkable that, using the traditional method,
Japanese farmers grew a crop of rice and a winter grain crop each year in the same field for centuries without
reducing the fertility of the soil.

Though he recognizes many virtues of the traditional farming, Mr. Fukuoka feels that it involves work that
is unnecessary. He speaks of his own methods as "do-nothing" farming and says that they make it possible even
for a "Sunday farmer" to grow enough food for the whole family. He does not mean, however, that his sort of

farming can be done entirely

without effort. His farm is maintained by a regular schedule of field chores. What is done must be done properly
and with sensitivity. Once the farmer has determined that a plot of land should grow rice or vegetables and has
cast the seed, he must assume responsibility for maintaining that plot. To disrupt nature and then to abandon her
is harmful and irresponsible.

In the fall Mr. Fukuoka sows the seeds of rice, white clover, and winter grain onto the same fields and
covers them with a thick layer of rice straw. The barley or rye and the clover sprout up right away; the rice seeds
lie dormant until spring.

While the winter grain is growing and ripening in the lower fields, the orchard hillsides become the center
of activity. The citrus harvest lasts from mid-November to April.

The rye and barley are harvested in May and spread to dry on the field for a week or ten days. They are then
threshed, winnowed, and put into sacks for storage. All of the straw is scattered unshredded across the field as
mulch. Water is then held in the field for a short time during the monsoon rains in June to weaken the clover and
weeds and to give the rice a chance to sprout through the ground cover. Once the field is drained, the clover
recovers and spreads beneath the growing rice plants. From then until harvest, a time of heavy labor for the
traditional farmer, the only jobs in Mr. Fukuoka's rice fields are those of maintaining the drainage channels and
mowing the narrow walkways between the fields.

The rice is harvested in October. The grain is hung to dry and then threshed. Autumn. seeding is completed
just as the early varieties of mandarin oranges are becoming ripe and ready for harvest.

Mr. Fukuoka harvests between 18 and 22 bushels (1,100 to 1,300 pounds) of rice per quarter acre.

This yield is approximately the same as is produced by either the chemical or the traditional method in his area.

The yield of his winter grain crop is often higher than that of either the traditional farmer or the chemical farmer

who both use the ridge and furrow method of cultivation.

All three methods (natural, traditional, and chemical) yield comparable harvests, but differ markedly in their

effect on the soil. The soil in Mr. Fukuoka's fields improves with each season. Over the past twenty-five years,

since he stopped plowing, his fields have improved in fertility, structure, and in their ability to retain water. By

the traditional method the condition of the soil over the years remains about the same. The farmer takes yields in

direct proportion to the amount of compost and manure he puts in. The soil in the fields of the chemical farmer

becomes lifeless and depleted of .its native fertility in a short time.

One of the greatest advantages of Mr. Fukuoka's method is that rice can be grown without flooding the field

throughout the growing season. Few people

have ever thought this possible. It is possible, and Mr. Fukuoka

maintains that rice grows better this way. His rice plants are strong-stemmed and deeply rooted. The old variety

of glutinous rice that he grows has between 250 and 300 grains per head.

The use of mulch increases the soil's abi

ity to retain water. In many places natural farming can completely

eliminate the need for irrigation. Rice and other high-yielding crops can therefore be grown in areas not

previously thought suitable. Steep and otherwise marginal land can be brought into production without danger

of erosion. By means of natural farming, soi!

chemicals can be effectively rehabilitated.

Plant diseases and insects are present in

s already damaged by careless agricultural practices or by

the fields

and in the orchard, but the crops are never devastated. The damage affects only the weakest plants. Mr. Fukuoka
insists that the best disease and insect control is to grow crops in a healthy environment.

The fruit trees of Mr. Fukuoka's orchard are not pruned low and wide for easy harvesting, but are allowed to
grow into their distinctive natural shapes. Vegetables and herbs are grown on the orchard slopes with a
minimum of soil preparation. During the spring, seeds of burdock, cabbage, radish, soybeans, mustard, turnips,
carrots and other vegetables are mixed together and tossed out to germinate in an open area among the trees
before one of the long spring rains. This sort of planting obviously would not work everywhere. It works well in
Japan where there is a humid climate with rain dependably falling throughout the spring months. The texture of
the soil of Mr. Fukuoka's orchard is clayey. The surface layer is rich in organic matter, friable, and retains water
well. This is the result of the cover of weeds and clover that has grown in the orchard continuously for many
years.

The weeds must be cut back when the vegetable seedlings are young, but once the vegetables have
established themselves they are left to grow up with the natural ground cover. Some vegetables go unharvested,
the seeds fall, and after one or two generations, they revert to the growing habits of their strong and slightly
bitter-tasting wild predecessors. Many of these vegetables grow up completely untended. Once, not long after I
came to Mr. Fukuoka's farm, I was walking through a remote section of the orchard and unexpectedly kicked
something hard in the tall grass. Stooping to look more closely, I found a cucumber, and nearby I found a squash
nestled among the clover.

For years Mr. Fukuoka wrote about his method in

books and magazines, and was interviewed on radio and television, but almost no one followed his example. At
that time Japanese society was moving with determination in exactly the opposite direction.

After the Second World War, the Americans introduced modern chemical agriculture to Japan. This enabled
the Japanese farmer to produce approximately the same yields as the traditional method, but the farmer's time
and labor were reduced by more than half. This seemed a dream come true, and within one generation almost
everyone had switched to chemical agriculture.

For centuries Japanese farmers had maintained organic matter in the soil by rotating crops, by adding
compost and manure, and by growing cover crops. Once these practices were neglected and fast-acting chemical
fertilizer was used instead, the humus was depleted in a single generation. The structure of the soil deteriorated;
crops became weak and dependent on chemical nutrients. To make up for reduced human and animal labor, the
new system mined the fertility reserves of the soil.

During the past forty years Mr. Fukuoka has witnessed with indignation the degeneration both of the land
and of Japanese society. The Japanese followed singlemindedly the American model of economic and industrial
development. The population shifted as farmers migrated from the countryside into the growing industrial
centers. The rural village where Mr. Fukuoka was born and where the Fukuoka family has probably lived for
1,400 years or more now stands at the edge of the advancing suburbs of Matsuyama City. A national highway

with its litter of sake bottles and trash passes through Mr. Fukuoka's rice fields.

Although he does not identify his philosophy with any particular religious sect or organization,

Mr. Fukuoka's terminology and teaching methods are strongly influenced by Zen Buddhism and Taoism. He will
sometimes also quote from the Bible and bring up points of Judeo-Christian philosophy and theology to
illustrate what he is saying or to stimulate discussion.

Mr. Fukuoka believes that natural farming proceeds from the spiritual health of the individual. He considers
the healing of the land and the purification of the human spirit to be one process, and he proposes a way of life
and a way of farming in which this process can take place.

It is unrealistic to believe that; in his lifetime and within current conditions, Mr. Fukuoka could completely
realize his vision in practice. Even after more than thirty years his techniques are still evolving. His great
contribution is to demonstrate that the daily process of establishing spiritual health can bring about a practical
and beneficial transformation of the world.

Today, the general recognition of the long-term dangers of chemical farming has renewed interest in
alternative methods of agriculture. Mr. Fukuoka has emerged as a leading spokesman for agricultural revolution
in Japan. Since the publication of The One Straw Revolution in October, 1975, interest in natural farming has
spread rapidly among the Japanese people.

During the year-and-a-half that I worked at Mr. Fukuoka's, I returned frequently to my farm in Kyoto.
Everyone there was anxious to try the new method and gradually more and more of our land was converted to
natural farming.

Besides rice and rye in the traditional rotation, we also grew wheat, buckwheat, potatoes, corn, and

soybeans by Mr. Fukuoka's method. To plant corn and other row crops which germinate slowly, we poked a

hole in the soil with a stick or a piece of bamboo and dropped a seed into each hole. We interplanted the corn
with soybeans by the same method or by wrapping the seeds in clay pellets and scattering them onto the field.
Then we mowed the ground cover of weeds and white clover, and covered the field with straw. The clover came
back, but only after the corn and soybeans were well established.

Mr. Fukuoka was able to help by making some suggestions, but we had to adjust the method by trial and
error to our various crops and local conditions. We knew from the start that it would take more than just a few
seasons, both for the land and our own spirits, to change over to natural farming. The transition has become an

on-going process.

Larry Kom

Notes on the Translation

A literal translation from one language to another would be challenging enough, but to retain the flavor and
cultural context of the original as well, is even more difficult. In particular, Japanese is more subtle than English
in expressing the kind of spiritual experiences and philosophical teachings which are found in this book. Some
terms, such as "discriminating" and "non-discriminating" knowledge, "no mind," and "do-nothing" have no
English equivalent, and so have been rendered literally with additional explanation provided in notes.

It is a common teaching device among Oriental philosophers to use paradox, illogic, and apparent
contradiction to help break habitual patterns of thought. Such passages are not necessarily to be taken either
literally or figuratively, but rather as exercises to open the consciousness to perception beyond the reach of the
intellect.

The Japanese, mugi, translated as "winter grain," includes wheat, rye, and barley. The growing methods for
these grains are similar, except that wheat generally takes a few weeks longer to mature. Rye and barley are
much more commonly grown in Japan because wheat is not ready for harvest until the middle of the Japanese

rainy season.

The Japanese, mikan, is translated as citrus. The most common Oriental citrus is the mandarin orange.
While many varieties of mandarin oranges are grown in Japan, the most common is a small orange fruit very
much like our familiar tangerine.

Where context requires, the precise winter grain and citrus varieties are given.

The translation of The One-Straw Revolution was begun at Mr. Fukuoka's farm, and under his supervision in
Spring, 1976. It is not a verbatim translation. Sections of other works by Mr. Fukuoka, as well as parts of

conversations with him, have been included in the text.

L.K.



The One — Straw Revolution


Look at this Grain

I believe that a revolution can begin from this one strand of straw. Seen at a glance, this rice straw may
appear light and insignificant. Hardly anyone would believe that it could start a revolution. But I have come to
realize the weight and power of this straw. For me, this revolution is very real.

Take a look at these fields of rye and barley. This ripening grain will yield about 22 bushels (1,300 pounds)
per quarter acre. I believe this matches the top yields in Ehime Prefecture. And if this equals the best yield in
Ehime Prefecture, it could easily equal the top harvest in the whole country since this is one of the prime
agricultural areas in Japan. And yet these fields have not been plowed for twenty-five years.

To plant, I simply broadcast rye and barley seed on separate fields in the fall, while the rice is still standing.
A few weeks later I harvest the rice and spread the rice straw back over the fields.

It is the same for the rice seeding. This winter grain will be cut around the 20th of May. About two weeks
before the crop has fully matured, I broadcast rice seed over the rye and barley. After the winter grain has been
harvested and the grains threshed, I spread the rye and barley straw over the field.

I suppose that using the same method to plant rice and winter grain is unique to this kind of farming.

But there is an easier way. As we walk over to the next field, let me point out that the rice there was sown last
fall at the same time as the winter grain. The whole year's planting was finished in that field by New Year's Day.
You might also notice that white clover and weeds are growing in these fields. Clover seed was sown among
the rice plants in early October, shortly before the rye and barley. I do not worry about sowing the weeds-they
reseed themselves quite easily.
So the order of planting in this field is like this: in early October clover is broadcast among the rice; winter

grain then follows in the middle of the month.

“And yet these fields have not been plowed for twenty-five years”

In early November, the rice is harvested, and then the next year's rice seed is sown and' straw laid across the
field. The rye and barley you see in front of you were grown this way. ,

In caring for a quarter-acre field, one or two people can do all the work of growing rice and winter grain in a
matter of a few days. It seems unlikely that there could be a simpler way of raising grain.

This method completely contradicts modern agricultural techniques. It throws scientific knowledge and
traditional farming know-how right out the window. With this kind of farming, which uses no machines, no
prepared fertilizer and no chemicals, it is possible to attain a harvest equal to or greater than that of the average

Japanese farm. The proof is ripening right before your eyes.

Nothing at All

Recently people have been asking me why I started farming this way so many years ago. Until now I have
never discussed this with anyone. You could say there was no way to talk about it. It was simply-how would you
say it-a shock, a flash, one small experience that was the starting point.

That realization completely changed my life. It is nothing you can really talk about, but it might be put
something like this: "Humanity knows nothing at all. There is no intrinsic value in anything, and every action is
a futile, meaningless effort." This may seem preposterous, but if you put it into words, that is the only way to
describe it.

This "thought" developed suddenly in my head when I was still quite young. I did not know if this insight,
that all human understanding and effort are of no account, was valid or not, but if I examined these thoughts and
tried to banish them, I could come up with nothing within myself to contradict them. Only the certain belief that
this was so burned within me.

It is generally thought that there is nothing more splendid than human intelligence, that human beings are
creatures of special value, and that their creations and accomplishments as mirrored in culture and his tory are

wondrous to behold. That is the common belief, anyway.

Since what I was thinking was a denial of this, I was unable to communicate my view to anyone. Eventually
I decided to give my thoughts a form, to put them into practice, and so to determine whether my understanding
was right or wrong. To spend my life farming, growing rice and winter grain-this was the course upon, which I
settled.

And what was this experience that changed my life?

Forty years ago, when I was twenty-five years old, I was working for the Yokohama Customs Bureau in the
Plant Inspection Division. My main job was to inspect incoming and outgoing plants for disease carrying
insects. I was fortunate to have a good deal of free time, which I spent in the research laboratory, carrying out
investigations in my specialty of plant pathology. This laboratory was located next to Yamate Park and looked
down on Yokohama harbor from the bluff. Directly in front of the building was the Catholic Church, and to the
east was the Ferris Girls' School. It was very quiet, all in all the perfect environment for carrying on research.

The laboratory pathology researcher was Eiichi Kurosawa. I had studied plant pathology under Makoto
Okera, a teacher at Gifu Agricultural High School, and received guidance from Suehiko Igata of the Okayama
Prefecture Agricultural Testing Center.

I was very fortunate to be a student of Professor Kurosawa. Although he remained largely unknown in the
academic world, he is the man who isolated and raised in culture the fungus which causes bakanae disease in
rice. He became the first to extract the plant growth hormone, gibberellin, from the fungus culture. This
hormone, when a small amount is absorbed by the young rice plants, has the peculiar effect of causing the plant

to grow abnormally tall. When given in excess, however, it brings about the

opposite reaction, causing the plant's growth to be retarded. No one took much notice of this discovery in Japan,
but overseas it became a topic of active research. Soon thereafter, an American made use of gibberellin in
developing the seedless grape.

I regarded Kurosawa-san [san is a formal title of address in Japanese used for both men and women.] as
my own father, and with his guidance, built a dissection microscope and devoted myself to research on
decay-causing resin diseases in the trunk, branches and fruit of American and Japanese citrus trees.

Looking through the microscope, I observed fungus cultures, crossbred various fungi and created new
disease causing varieties. I was fascinated with my work. Since the job required deep, sustained concentration,
there were times when I actually fell unconscious while working in the lab.

This was also a time of youthful high spirits and I did not spend all of my time shut up in the research room.
The place was the port city of Yokohama, no better spot to fool around and have a good time. It was during that
time that the following episode occurred. Intent, and with camera in hand, I was strolling by the wharf and
caught sight of a beautiful woman. Thinking that she would make a great subject for a photograph, I asked her to
pose for me. I helped her onto the deck of the foreign ship anchored there, and asked her to look this way and
that and took several pictures. She asked me to send her copies when the photos were ready. When I asked
where to send them, she just said, "To Ofuna," and left without mentioning her name.

After I had developed the film, I showed the prints to a friend and asked if he recognized her. He gasped and

said, "That's Mieko Takamine, the famous

movie star!" Right away, I sent ten enlarged prints to her in Ofuna City. Before long, the prints, autographed,
were returned in the mail. There was one missing, however. Thinking about this later, I realized that it was the
close-up profile shot I had taken; it probably showed some wrinkles in her face. I was delighted and felt I had
caught a glimpse into the feminine psyche. '

At other times, clumsy and awkward though I was, I frequented a dance hall in the Nankingai area. One time
I caught sight there of the popular singer, Noriko Awaya, and asked her to dance. I can never forget the feeling
of that dance, because I was so overwhelmed by her huge body that I could not even get my arm around her
waist.

In any event, I was a very busy, very fortunate young man, spending my days in amazement at the world of
nature revealed through the eyepiece of the microscope, struck by how similar this minute world was to the
great world of the infinite universe. In the evening, either in or out of love, I played around and enjoyed myself.
I believe it was this aimless life, coupled with fatigue from overwork, that finally led to fainting spells in the
research room. The consequence of all this was that I contracted acute pneumonia and was placed in the
pneumothorax treatment room on the top floor of the Police Hospital.

It was winter and through a broken window the wind blew swirls of snow around the room. It was warm
beneath the covers, but my face was like ice. The nurse would check my temperature and be gone in an instant.

As it was a private room, people hardly ever looked in. I felt I had been put out in the bitter cold, and
suddenly plunged into a world of solitude and loneliness. I found myself face to face with the fear of death. As I

think about it now, it seems a useless fear,

but at the time, I took it seriously.

I was finally released from the hospital, but I could not pull myself out of my depression. In what had I
placed my confidence until then? I had been unconcerned and content, but what was the nature of that
complacency? I was in an agony of doubt about the nature of life and death. I could not sleep, could not apply
myself to my work. In nightly wanderings above the bluff and beside the harbor, I could find no relief.

One night as I wandered, I collapsed in exhaustion on a hill overlooking the harbor, finally dozing against
the trunk of a large tree. I lay there, neither asleep nor awake, until dawn. I can still remember that it was the
morning of the-15th of May. In a daze I watched the harbor grow light, seeing the sunrise and yet somehow not-
seeing it. As the breeze blew up from below the bluff; the morning mist suddenly disappeared. Just at that
moment a night heron appeared, gave a sharp cry, and flew away into the distance. I could hear the flapping of
its wings. In an instant all my doubts and the gloomy mist of my confusion vanished. Everything I had held in
firm conviction, everything upon which I had ordinarily relied was swept away with the wind. I felt that I
understood just one thing. Without my thinking about them, words came from my mouth: "In this world there is
nothing at all..." I felt that I understood nothing. [To "understand nothing," in this sense, is to recognize the
insufficiency of intellectual knowledge]

I could see that all the concepts to which I had been clinging, the very notion of existence itself, were empty
fabrications. My spirit became light and clear. I was dancing wildly for joy. I could hear the small birds chirping

in the trees, and see the distant waves glistening in the rising sun. The leaves danced green

and sparkling. I felt that this was truly heaven on earth. Everything that had possessed me, all the agonies,
disappeared like dreams and illusions, and something one might call "true nature" stood revealed.

I think it could safely be said that from the experience of that morning my life changed completely.

Despite the change, I remained at root an average, foolish man, and there has been no change in this from
then to the present time. Seen from the outside, there is no more run-of-the-mill fellow than I, and there has been
nothing extraordinary about my daily life. But the assurance that I know this one thing has not changed since

that time. I have spent thirty years, forty years, testing whether or not I have been mistaken,

reflecting as I went along, but not once have I found evidence to oppose my conviction.

That this realization in itself has great value does not mean that any special value is attached to me. I remain
a simple man, just an old crow, so to speak. To the casual observer I may seem either humble or arrogant. I tell
the young people up in my orchard again and again not to try to imitate me, and it really angers me if there is
someone who does not take this advice to heart. I ask, instead, that they simply live in nature and apply
themselves to their daily work. No, there is nothing special about me, but what I have glimpsed is vastly

important.

Returning to the Country

On the day following this experience, May 16th, I reported to work and handed in my resignation on the
spot. My superiors and friends were amazed. They had no idea what to make of this. They held a farewell party
for me in a restaurant above the wharf, but the atmosphere was a bit peculiar. This young man who had, until the
previous day, gotten along well with everyone, who did not seem particularly dissatisfied with his work, who, on
the contrary, had wholeheartedly dedicated himself to his research, had suddenly announced that he was
quitting. And there I was, laughing happily.

At that time I addressed everyone as follows, "On this side is the wharf. On the other side is Pier 4. If you
think there is life on this side, then death is on the other. If you want to get rid of the idea of death, then you
should rid yourself of the notion that there is life on this side. Life and death are one."

When I said this everyone became even more concerned about me. "What's he saying? He must be out of his
mind," they must have thought. They all saw me off with rueful faces. I was the only one who walked out
briskly, in high spirits.

At that time my roommate was extremely worried about me and suggested that I take a quiet rest, perhaps

out on the Boso Peninsula. So I left. I would

have gone anywhere at all if someone had asked me. I boarded the bus and rode for many miles gazing out at the
checkered pattern of fields and small villages along the highway. At one stop, I saw a small sign which read,
"Utopia." I got off the bus there and set out in search of it.

On the coast there was a small inn and, climbing the cliff, I found a place with a truly wonderful view. I
stayed at the inn and spent the days dozing in the tall grasses overlooking the sea. It may have been a few days, a
week, or a month, but anyway I stayed there for some time. As the days passed my exhilaration dimmed, and I
began to reflect on just what had happened. You could say I was finally coming to myself again.

I went to Tokyo and stayed for a while, passing the days by walking in the park, stopping people on the
street and talking to them, sleeping here and there. My friend was worried and came to see how I was getting
along. "Aren't you living in some dream world, some world of illusion?" he asked. "No," I replied, "it's you who
are living in the dream world." We both thought, "I am right and you are in the dream world." When my friend
turned to say goodbye, I answered with something like, "Don't say good-bye. To part is just to part." My friend
seemed to have given up hope.

I left Tokyo, passed through the Kansai area [Osaka, Kobe, Kyoto.] and came as far south as Kyushu. I was
enjoying myself, drifting from place to place with the breeze. I challenged a lot of people with my conviction
that everything is meaningless and of no value, that everything returns to nothingness.

But this was too much, or too little, for the everyday world to conceive. There was no communication

whatsoever. I could only think of this concept of non-usefulness as being of great benefit to the world, and
particularly the present world which is moving so rapidly in the opposite direction. I actually wandered about
with the intention of spreading the word throughout the whole country. The outcome was that wherever I went I
was ignored as an eccentric. So I returned to my father's farm in the country.

My father was growing tangerines at that time and I moved into a hut on the mountain and began to live a
very simple, primitive life. I thought that if here, as a farmer of citrus and grain, I could actually demonstrate my
realization, the world would recognize its truth. Instead of offering a hundred explanations, would not practicing
this philosophy be the best way? My method of "do-nothing"[With this expression Mr. Fukuoka draws attention
to his method's comparative ease. This way of farming requires hard work, especially at the harvest, but far less
than other methods] farming began with this thought. It was in the 13th year of the present emperor's reign,
1938.

I settled myself on the mountain and everything went well up to the time that my father entrusted me with
the richly-bearing trees in the orchard. He had already pruned the trees to "the shape of sake cups" so that the
fruit could easily be harvested. When I left them abandoned in this state, the result was that the branches became
intertwined, insects attacked the trees and the entire orchard withered away in no time:

My conviction was that crops grow themselves and should not have to be grown. I had acted in the belief
that everything should be left to take its natural course, but I found that if you apply this way of thinking all at

once, before long things do not go so well. This is abandonment, not "natural farming."

My father was shocked. He said I must rediscipline myself, perhaps take a job somewhere and return when I
had pulled myself back together. At that time my father was headman of the village, and it was hard for the other
members of the community to relate to his eccentric son, who obviously could not get along with the world,
living as he did back in the mountains. Moreover, I disliked the prospect of military service, and as the war was
becoming more and more violent, I decided to go along humbly with my father's wishes and take a job.

At that time technical specialists were few. The Kochi Prefecture Testing Station heard about me, and it
came about that I was offered the post of Head Researcher of Disease and Insect Control. I imposed upon the
kindness of Kochi Prefecture for almost eight years. At the testing center I became a supervisor in the scientific
agriculture division, and in research devoted myself to increasing wartime food productivity. But actually during
those eight years, I was pondering the relationship between scientific and natural agriculture. Chemical
agriculture, which utilizes the products of human intelligence, was reputed to be superior. The question which
was always in the back of my mind was whether or not natural agriculture could stand up against modern
science.

When the war ended I felt a fresh breeze of freedom, and with a sigh of relief I returned to my home village

to take up farming anew.

Toward a Do-Nothing Farming

For thirty years I lived only in my farming and had little contact with people outside my own community.
During those years I was heading in a straight line toward a "do-nothing" agricultural method.

The usual way to go about developing a method is to ask "How about trying this?" or "How about trying
that?" bringing in a variety of techniques one upon the other. This is modern agriculture and it only results in
making the farmer busier.

My way was opposite. I was aiming at a pleasant, natural way of farming [Farming as simply as possible
within and in cooperation with the natural environment, rather than the modern approach of applying
increasingly complex techniques to remake nature entirely for the benefit of human beings] which results in
making the work easier instead of harder. "How about not doing this? How about not doing that?"- that was my
way of thinking. I ultimately reached the conclusion that there was no need to plow, no need to apply fertilizer,
no need to make compost, no need to use insecticide. When you get right down to it, there are few agricultural
practices that are really necessary.

The reason that man's improved techniques seem to be necessary is that the natural balance has been so

badly upset beforehand by those same techniques that the land has become dependent on them.

This line of reasoning not only applies to agriculture, but to other aspects of human society as well. Doctors
and medicine become necessary when people create a sickly environment. Formal schooling has no intrinsic
value, but becomes necessary when humanity creates a condition in which one must become "educated" to get
along.

Before the end of the war, when I went up to the citrus orchard to practice what I then thought was natural
farming, I did no pruning and left the orchard to itself. The branches became tangled, the trees were attacked by
insects and almost two acres of mandarin orange trees withered and died. From that time on the question, "What
is the natural pattern?" was always in my mind. In the process of arriving at the answer, I wiped out another 400
trees. Finally I felt I could say with certainty: "This is the natural pattern."

To the extent that trees deviate from their natural

“For thirty years I lived only in my farming....”

form, pruning and insect extermination become necessary; to the extent that human society separates itself from
a life close to nature, schooling becomes necessary. In nature, formal schooling has no function.

In raising children, many parents make the same mistake I made in the orchard at first. For example,
teaching music to children is as unnecessary as pruning orchard trees. A child's ear catches the music. The
murmuring of a stream, the sound of frogs croaking by the riverbank, the rustling of leaves in the forest, all these
natural sounds are music-true music. But when a variety of disturbing noises enter and confuse the ear, the
child's pure, direct appreciation of music degenerates. If left to continue along that path, the child will be unable
to hear the call of a bird or the sound of the wind as songs. That is why music education is thought to be
beneficial to the child's development.

The child who is raised with an ear pure and clear may not be able to play the popular tunes on the violin or
the piano, but I do not think this has anything to do with the ability to hear true music or to sing. It is when the
heart is filled with song that the child can be said to be musically gifted.

Almost everyone thinks that "nature" is a good thing, but few can grasp the difference between natural and
unnatural.

Ifa single new bud is snipped off a fruit tree with a pair of scissors, that may bring about disorder which
cannot be undone. When growing according to the natural form, branches spread alternately from the trunk and
the leaves receive sunlight uniformly. If this sequence is disrupted the branches come into conflict, lie one upon
another and become tangled, and the leaves wither in the places where the sun cannot penetrate. Insect damage

develops. If the tree

is not pruned the following year more withered branches will appear.

Human beings with their tampering do something wrong, leave the damage unrepaired, and when the
adverse results accumulate, work with all their might to correct them. When the corrective actions appear to be
successful, they come to view these measures as splendid accomplishments. People do this over and over again.
It is as if a fool were to stomp on and break the tiles of his roof. Then when it starts to rain and the ceiling
begins to rot away, he hastily climbs up to mend the damage, rejoicing in the end that he has accomplished a
miraculous solution.

It is the same with the scientist. He pores over books night and day, straining his eyes and becoming
nearsighted, and if you wonder what on earth he has been working on all that time-it is to become the inventor

of eyeglasses to correct nearsightedness.

Returning to the Source

Leaning against the long handle of my scythe, I pause in my work in the orchard and gaze out at the
mountains and the village below. I wonder how it is that people's philosophies have come to spin faster than the
changing seasons.

The path I have followed, this natural way of farming, which strikes most people as strange, was first
interpreted as a reaction against the advance and reckless development of science. But all I have been doing,
farming out here in the country, is trying to show that humanity knows nothing. Because the world is moving
with such furious energy in the opposite direction, it may appear that I have fallen behind the times, but I firmly
believe that the path I have been following is the most sensible one.

During the past few years the number of people interested in natural farming has grown considerably. It
seems that the limit of scientific development has been reached, misgivings have begun to be felt, and the time
for reappraisal has arrived. That which was viewed as primitive and backward is now unexpectedly seen to be
far ahead of modern science. This may seem strange at first, but I do not find it strange at all.

I discussed this with Kyoto University Professor Iinuma recently. A thousand years ago agriculture

was practiced in Japan without plowing, and it was not until the Tokugawa Era 300-400 years ago that shallow
cultivation was introduced. Deep plowing came to Japan with Western agriculture. I said that in coping with the
problems of the future the next generation would return to the non-cultivation method.

To grow crops in an unplowed field may seem at first a regression to primitive agriculture, but over the
years this method has been shown in university laboratories and agricultural testing centers across the country to
be the most simple, efficient, and upto-date method of all. Although this way of farming disavows modern
science, it now has come to stand in the forefront of modern agricultural development.

I presented this "direct seeding non-cultivation winter grain/rice succession" in agricultural journals twenty
years ago. From then on it appeared often in print and was introduced to the public at large on radio and
television programs many times, but nobody paid much attention to it.

Now suddenly, it is a completely different story. You might say that natural farming has become the rage.
Journalists, professors, and technical researchers are flocking to visit my fields and the huts up on the mountain.
Different people see it from different points of view, make their own interpretations, and then leave. One
sees it as primitive, another as backward, someone else considers it the pinnacle of agricultural achievement,
and a fourth hails it as a breakthrough into the future. In general, people are only concerned with whether this

kind of farming is an advance into the future or a revival of times past. Few are able to grasp correctly that
natural farming arises from the unmoving and unchanging center of agricultural development.

To the extent that people separate themselves

from nature, they spin out further and further from the center. At the same time, a centripetal effect asserts itself
and the desire to return to nature arises. But if people merely become caught up in reacting, moving to the left or
to the right, depending on conditions, the result is only more activity. The nonmoving point of origin, which lies
outside the realm of relativity, is passed over, unnoticed. I believe that even "returning-to-nature" and
anti-pollution activities, no matter how commendable, are not moving toward a genuine solution if they are
carried out solely in reaction to the over development of the present age.

Nature does not change, although the way of viewing, nature invariably changes from age to age. No matter

the age, natural farming exists forever as the wellspring of agriculture.

One Reason That
Natural Farming Has Not Spread

Over the past twenty or thirty years this method of growing rice and winter grain has been tested over a wide
range of climates and natural conditions. Almost every prefecture in Japan has run tests comparing yields of
"direct seeding non-cultivation" with those of paddy rice growing and the usual ridge and furrow rye and barley
cultivation. These tests have produced no evidence to contradict the universal applicability of natural farming.

And so one may ask why this truth has not spread. I think that one of the reasons is that the world has
become so specialized that it has become impossible for people to grasp anything in its entirety. For example, an
expert in insect damage prevention from the Kochi Prefectural Testing Center came to inquire why there were
so few rice leaf-hoppers in my fields even though I had not used insecticide. Upon investigating the habitat, the
balance between insects and their natural enemies, the rate of spider propagation and so on, the leaf-hoppers
were found to be just as scarce in my fields as in the Center's fields, which are sprayed countless times with a
variety of deadly chemicals.

The professor was also surprised to find that while the harmful insects were few, their natural predators

were far more numerous in my fields than in

the sprayed fields. Then it dawned on him that the fields were being maintained in this state by means of a
natural balance established among the various insect communities. He acknowledged that if my method were
generally adopted, the problem of crop devastation by leaf-hoppers could be solved. He then got into his car and
returned to Kochi.

But if you ask whether or not the testing center's soil fertility or crop specialists have come here, the answer
is no, they have not. And if you were to suggest at a conference or gathering that this method, or rather
non-method, be tried on a wide scale, it is my guess that the prefecture or research station would reply, "Sorry,
it's too early for that. We must first carry out research from every possible angle before giving final approval." It
would take years for a conclusion to come down.

This sort of thing goes on all the time. Specialists and technicians from all over Japan have come to this
farm. Seeing the fields from the standpoint of his own specialty, every one of these researchers has found them
at least satisfactory, if not remarkable. But in the five or six years since the professor from the research station
came to visit here, there have been few changes in Kochi Prefecture.

This year the agricultural department of Kinki University has set up a natural farming project team in which
students of several different departments will come here to conduct investigations. This approach may be one
step nearer, but I have a feeling that the next move may be two steps in the opposite direction.

Self-styled experts often comment, "The basic idea of the method is all right, but wouldn't it be more
convenient to harvest by machine?" or, "Wouldn't the yield be greater if you used fertilizer or pesticide in

certain cases or at certain times?" There are always

those who try to mix natural and scientific farming. But this way of thinking completely misses the point. The
farmer who moves toward compromise can no longer criticize science at the fundamental level.
Natural farming is gentle and easy and indicates a return to the source of farming. A single step away from

the source can only lead one astray.

Humanity Does Not Know Nature

Lately I have been thinking that the point must be reached when scientists, politicians, artists, philosophers,
men of religion, and all those who work in the fields should gather here, gaze out over these fields, and talk
things over together. I think this is the kind of thing that must happen if people are to see beyond their
specialties.

Scientists think they can understand nature. That is the stand they take. Because they are convinced that they
can understand nature, they are committed to investigating nature and putting it to use. But I think an
understanding of nature lies beyond the reach of human intelligence.

I often tell the young people in the huts on the mountain, who come here to help out and to learn about
natural farming, that anybody can see the trees up on the- mountain. They can see the green of the leaves; they
can see the rice plants. They think they know what green is. In contact with nature morning and night, they
sometimes come to think that they know nature. But when they think they are beginning to understand nature,
they can be sure that they are on the wrong track.

Why is it impossible to know nature? That which is conceived to be nature is only the idea of nature arising

in each person's mind. The ones who see true

nature are infants. They see without thinking, straight and clear. If even the names of plants are known, a
mandarin orange tree of the citrus family, a pine of the pine family, nature is not seen in its true form.

An object seen in isolation from the whole is not the real thing.

Specialists in various fields gather together and observe a stalk of rice. The insect disease specialist sees
only insect damage, the specialist in plant nutrition considers only the plant's vigor. This is unavoidable as
things are now.

As an example, I told the gentleman from the research station when he was investigating the relation
between rice leaf-hoppers and spiders in my fields, "Professor, since you are researching spiders, you are
interested in only one among the many natural predators of the leaf-hopper. This year spiders appeared in great

numbers, but last year it was toads. Before that, it was frogs that predominated. There are countless variations."

It is impossible for specialized research to grasp the role of a single predator at a certain time within the
intricacy of insect inter-relationships. There are seasons when the leaf-hopper population is low because there
are many spiders. There are times when a lot of rain falls and frogs cause the spiders to disappear, or when little
rain falls and neither leaf-hoppers nor frogs appear at all.

Methods of insect control which ignore the relationships among the insects themselves are truly useless.
Research on spiders and leaf-hoppers must also consider the relation between frogs and spiders. When things
have reached this point, a frog professor will also be needed. Experts on spiders and leaf-hoppers, another on
rice, and another expert on water management will all have to join the gathering.

Furthermore, there are four or five different kinds of spiders in these fields. I remember a few years ago
when somebody came rushing over to the house early one morning to ask me if I had covered my fields with a
silk net or something. I could not imagine what he was talking about, so I hurried straight out to take a look.

We had just finished harvesting the rice, and overnight the rice stubble and low-lying grasses had become
completely covered with spider webs, as though with silk. Waving and sparkling with the morning mist, it was a
magnificent sight.

The wonder of it is that when this happens, as it does only once in a great while, it only lasts for a day or
two. If you look closely there are several spiders in every square inch. They are so thick en the field that there is
hardly any space between them. In a quarter acre there must be how many thousands, how many millions! When
you go to look at the field two or three days later, you see that strands of web several yards long have broken off

and are waving about in

the wind with five or six spiders clinging to each one. It is like when dandelion fluff or pine cone seeds are
blown away in the wind. The young spiders cling to the strands and are sent sailing off in the sky.

The spectacle is an amazing natural drama. Seeing this, you understand that poets and artists will also have
to join in the gathering.

When chemicals are put into a field, this is' all destroyed in an instant. I once thought there would be
nothing wrong with putting ashes from the fireplace onto the fields [Mr. Fukuoka makes compost of his wood
ashes and other organic household wastes. He applies this to his small kitchen garden.] The result was
astounding. Two or three days later the field was completely bare of spiders. The ashes had caused the strands
of web to disintegrate. How many thousands of spiders fell victim to a single handful of this apparently harmless
ash? Applying an insecticide is not simply a matter of eliminating the leaf-hoppers together with their natural
predators. Many other essential dramas of nature are affected.

The phenomenon of these great swarms of spiders, which appear in the rice fields in the autumn and like
escape artists vanish overnight, is still not understood. No one knows where they come from, how they survive
the winter, or where they go when they disappear.

And so the use of chemicals is not a problem for the entomologist alone. Philosophers, men of religion,
artists and poets must also help to decide whether or not it is permissible to use chemicals in farming, and what
the results of using even organic fertilizers might be.

We will harvest about 22 bushels (1,300 pounds) of rice, and 22 bushels of winter grain from each quarter

acre of this land. If the harvest reaches 29 bushels,

as it sometimes does, you might not be able to find a greater harvest if you searched the whole country. Since
advanced technology had nothing to do with growing this grain, it stands as a contradiction to the assumptions
of modern science. Anyone who will come and see these fields and accept their testimony, will feel deep
misgivings over the question of whether or not humans know nature, and of whether or not nature can be known
within the confines of human understanding.

The irony is that science has served only to show how small human knowledge is.




Four Principles
of Natural Farming

Make your way carefully through these fields. Dragonflies and moths fly up in a flurry. Honeybees buzz
from blossom to blossom. Part the leaves and you will see insects, spiders, frogs, lizards and many other small
animals bustling about in the cool shade. Moles and earthworms burrow beneath the surface.

This is a balanced rice field ecosystem. Insect and plant communities maintain a stable relationship here. It
is not uncommon for a plant disease to sweep through this area, leaving the crops in these fields unaffected.

And now look over at the neighbor's field for a moment. The weeds have all been wiped out by herbicides
and cultivation. The soil animals and insects have been exterminated by poison. The soil has been burned clean
of organic matter and microorganisms by chemical fertilizers. In the summer you see farmers at work in the
fields, wearing gas masks and long rubber gloves. These rice fields, which have been farmed continuously for

over 1,500 years, have now been laid waste by the exploitive farming practices of a single generation.

Four Principles

The first is NO CULTIVATION, that is, no plowing or turning of the soil. For centuries, farmers have

assumed

that the plow is essential for growing crops. However, non-cultivation is fundamental to natural farming. The
earth cultivates itself naturally by means of the penetration of plant roots and the activity of microorganisms,
small animals, and earthworms.

The second is NO CHEMICAL FERTILIZER OR PREPARED COMPOST [For fertilizer Mr. Fukuoka
grows a leguminous ground cover of white clover, returns the threshed straw to the fields, and adds a little
poultry manure.] People interfere with nature, and, try as they may, they cannot heal the resulting wounds. Their
careless farming practices drain the soil of essential nutrients and the result is yearly depletion of the land. If left
to itself, the soil maintains its fertility naturally, in accordance with the orderly cycle of plant and animal life.

The third is NO WEEDING BY TILLAGE OR HERBICIDES. Weeds play their part in building soil
fertility and in balancing the biological community. As a fundamental principle, weeds should be controlled, not
eliminated. Straw mulch, a ground cover of white clover interplanted with the crops, and temporary flooding
provide effective weed control in my fields.

The fourth is NO DEPENDENCE ON CHEMICALS [ Mr. Fukuoka grows his grain crops without
chemicals of any kind. On some orchard trees he occasionally uses a machine oil emulsion for the control of
insect scales. He uses no persistent or broad-spectrum poisons, and has no pesticide "program."] From the time
that weak plants developed as a result of such unnatural practices as plowing and fertilizing, disease and insect
imbalance became a great problem in agriculture. Nature, left alone, is in perfect balance. Harmful insects and
plant diseases are always present, but do not occur in nature to an extent which requires the use of poisonous
chemicals. The sensible approach to disease and insect control is to grow sturdy crops in a healthy environment.

Cultivation

When the soil is cultivated the natural environment is altered beyond recognition. The repercussions of such
acts have caused the farmer nightmares for countless generations. For example, when a natural area is brought
under the plow very strong weeds such as crabgrass and docks sometimes come to dominate the vegetation.
When these weeds take hold, the farmer is faced with a nearly impossible task of weeding each year. Very often,
the land is abandoned.

In coping with problems such as these, the only sensible approach is to discontinue the unnatural practices

which have brought about the situation in

the first place. The farmer also has a responsibility to repair the damage he has caused. Cultivation of the soil
should be discontinued. If gentle measures such as spreading straw and sowing clover are practiced, instead of
using man-made chemicals and machinery to wage a war of annihilation, then the environment will move back

toward its natural balance and even troublesome weeds can be brought under control.

Fertilizer

I have been known, in chatting with soil fertility experts, to ask, "Ifa field is left to itself, will the soil's
fertility increase or will it become depleted?" They usually pause and say something like, "Well, let's see ... It'll
become depleted. No, not when you remember that when rice is grown for a long time in the same field without
fertilizer, the harvest settles at about 9 bushels (525 pounds/ per quarter acre. The earth would become neither
enriched nor depleted."

These specialists are referring to a cultivated, flooded field. If nature is left to itself, fertility increases.
Organic remains of plants and animals accumulate and are decomposed on the surface by bacteria and fungi.
With the movement of rainwater, the nutrients are taken deep into the soil to become food for microorganisms,
earthworms, and other small animals. Plant roots reach to the lower soil strata and draw the nutrients back up to
the surface.

If you want to get an idea of the natural fertility of the earth, take a walk to the wild mountainside sometime
and look at the giant trees that grow without fertilizer and without cultivation. The fertility of nature, as it is, is
beyond reach of the imagination.

Cut down the natural forest cover, plant Japanese red pine or cedar trees for a few generations, and the soil

will become depleted and open to erosion. On the

other hand, take a barren mountain with poor, red clay soil, and plant pine or cedar with a ground cover of
clover and alfalfa. As the green manure [Ground cover crops such as clover, vetch, and alfalfa which condition
and nourish the soil.] enriches and softens the soil, weeds and bushes grow up below the trees, and a rich cycle
of regeneration is begun. There are instances in which the top four inches of soil have become enriched in less
than ten years.

For growing agricultural crops, also, the use of prepared fertilizer can be discontinued. For the most part, a
permanent green manure cover and the return of all the straw and chaff to the soil will be sufficient. To provide
animal manure to help decompose the straw, I used to let ducks loose in the fields. If they are introduced as
ducklings while the seedlings are still young, the ducks will grow up together with the rice. Ten ducks will
supply all the manure necessary for a quarter acre and will also help to control the weeds.

I did this for many years until the construction of a national highway made it impossible for the ducks to get
across the road and back to the coop. Now | use a little chicken manure to help decompose the straw. In other
areas ducks or other small grazing animals are still a practical possibility.

Adding too much fertilizer can lead to problems. One year, right after the rice transplanting, I contracted to
rent 11/4 acres of freshly planted rice fields for a period of one year. I ran all the water out of the fields and
proceeded without chemical fertilizer, applying only a small amount of chicken manure. Four of the fields
developed normally. But in the fifth, no matter what I did, the rice plants came up too thickly and were attacked
by blast disease. When I asked the owner about this, he said he had used the field over the winter as a dump for

chicken manure.

Using straw, green manure, and a little poultry manure, one can get high yields without adding compost or
commercial fertilizer at all. For several decades nom; I have been sitting back, observing nature's method of
cultivation and fertilization. And while watching, I have been reaping bumper crops of vegetables, citrus, rice,

and winter grain as a gift, so to speak, from the natural fertility of the earth.

Coping with Weeds

Here are some key points to remember in dealing with weeds:

As soon as cultivation is discontinued, the number of weeds decreases sharply. Also, the varieties of weeds
in a given field will change.

If seeds are sown while the preceding crop is still ripening in the field, those seeds will germinate ahead of
the weeds. Winter weeds sprout only after the rice has been harvested, but by that time the winter grain already
has a head start. Summer weeds sprout right after the harvest of barley and rye, but the rice is already growing
strongly. Timing the seeding in such a way that there is no interval between succeeding crops gives the grain a
great advantage over the weeds.

Directly after the harvest, if the whole field is covered with straw, the germination of weeds is stopped
short. White clover sowed with the grain as a ground cover also helps to keep weeds under control.

The usual way to deal with weeds is to cultivate the soil. But when you cultivate, seeds lying deep in the
soil, which would never have germinated otherwise, are stirred up and given a chance to sprout. Furthermore,
the quick sprouting, fast-glowing varieties are given the advantage under these conditions. So you might say that
the farmer who tries to control weeds by cultivating the soil is, quite literally, sowing the seeds of his own

misfortune.

"Pest" Control

Let us say that there are still some people who think that if chemicals are not used their fruit trees and field
crops will wither before their very eyes. The fact of the matter is that by using these chemicals, people have
unwittingly brought about the conditions in which this unfounded fear may become reality.

Recently Japanese red pines have been suffering severe damage from an outbreak of pine bark weevils.
Foresters are now using helicopters in an attempt to stop the damage by aerial spraying. I do not deny that this is
effective in the short run, but I know there must be another way.

Weevil blights, according to the latest research, are not a direct infestation, but follow upon the action of
mediating nematodes. The nematodes breed within the trunk, block the transport of water and nutrients, and
eventually cause the pine to wither and die. The ultimate cause, of course, is not yet clearly understood.

Nematodes feed on a fungus within the tree's trunk. Why did this fungus begin to spread so prolifically
within the tree? Did the fungus begin to multiply after the nematode had already appeared? Or did the nematode
appear because the fungus was already present? It boils down to a question of which came first, the fungus or
the nematode?

Furthermore, there is another microbe about which very little is known, which always accompanies the
fungus, and a virus toxic to the fungus. Effect following effect in every direction, the only thing that can be said
with certainty is that the pine trees are withering in unusual numbers.

People cannot know what the true cause of the pine blight is, nor can they know the ultimate consequences

of their "remedy" If the situation is meddled with unknowingly, that only sows the seeds for the next great
catastrophe. No, I cannot rejoice in the knowledge that immediate damage from the weevil has been reduced by
chemical spraying. Using agricultural chemicals is the most inept way to deal with problems such as these, and
will only lead to greater problems in the future.

These four principles of natural farming (no cultivation, no chemical fertilizer or prepared compost, no
weeding by tillage or herbicides, and no dependence on chemicals) comply with the natural order and lead to the
replenishment of nature's richness. All my fumblings have run along this line of thought. It is the heart of my

method of growing vegetables, grain, and citrus.

Farming Among the Weeds

Many different kinds of weeds are growing with the grain and clover in these fields. Rice straw spread over
the field last fall has already decomposed into rich humus. The harvest will yield about 22 bushels (1,300
pounds) to the quarter acre.

Yesterday, when Professor Kawase; a leading authority on pasture grasses, and Professor Hiroe, who is
researching ancient plants, saw the fine spread of barley and green manure in my fields, they called it a
wonderful work of art. A local farmer who had expected to see my fields completely overgrown by weeds was
surprised to find the barley growing so vigorously among the many other plants. Technical experts have also
come here, seen the weeds, seen the watercress and clover growing all around, and have gone away shaking
their heads in amazement.

Twenty years ago, when I was encouraging the use of permanent ground cover in fruit orchards, there was
not a blade of grass to be seen in fields or orchards anywhere in the country. Seeing orchards such as mine,
people came to understand that fruit trees could grow quite well among the weeds and grasses. Today orchards
covered with grasses are common throughout Japan and those without grass cover have become rare.

It is the same with fields of grain. Rice, barley,

and rye can be successfully grown while the fields are covered with clover and weeds all year long.

Let me review in greater detail the annual seeding and harvesting schedule in these fields. In early October,
before the harvest, white clover and the seeds of fast-growing varieties of winter grain are broadcast among the
ripening stalks of rice [White clover is sown about one pound per quarter acre, winter grains 6% to 13 pounds
per quarter acre. For inexperienced farmers or fields with hard or poor soil, it is safer to sow more seed in the
beginning. As the soil gradually improves from the decomposing straw and green manure, and as the farmer
becomes more familiar with the direct seeding non-cultivation method, the amount of seed can be reduced.] The
clover and barley or rye sprout and grow an inch or two by the time the rice is ready to be harvested. During the
rice harvest, the sprouted seeds are trampled by the feet of the harvesters, but recover in no time at all. When the

threshing is completed, the rice straw is spread over the field.

“Tn one day it is possible to make enough pellets to seed several acres.”

If rice is sown in the autumn and left uncovered, the seeds are often eaten by mice and birds, or they
sometimes rot on the ground, and so I enclose the rice seeds in little clay pellets before sowing. The seed is
spread out on a flat pan or basket and shaken back and forth in a circular motion. Fine powdered clay is dusted
over them and a thin mist of water is added from time to time. This forms a tiny pellet about a half inch in

diameter.

There is another method for making the pellets.

In October, after the rice is harvested and the next year’s seed is sown, straw is scattered across the field.

First the unhulled rice seed is soaked for several hours in water. The seeds are removed and mixed with moist
clay by kneeding with hands or feet. Then the clay is pushed through a screen of chicken wire to separate it into
small clods. The clods should be left to dry for a day or two or until they can be easily rolled between the palms
into pellets. Ideally there is one seed in each pellet. In one day it is possible to make enough pellets to seed
several acres.

Depending on conditions, I sometimes enclose the seeds of other grains and vegetables in pellets before
sowing.

Between mid-November and mid-December is a good time to broadcast the pellets containing the rice seed
among the young barley or rye plants, but they can also be broadcast in spring [ Rice is sown 4% to 9 pounds per
quarter acre. Toward the end of April Mr. Fukuoka checks the germination of the fall-sown seed and broadcasts
more pellets as needed.] A thin layer of chicken manure is spread over the field to help decompose the straw,
and the year's planting is complete.

In May the winter grain is harvested. After threshing, all of the straw is scattered over the field.

Water is then allowed to stand in the field for a week or ten days. This causes the weeds and clover to
weaken and allows the rice to sprout up through the straw. Rain water alone is sufficient for the plants during
June and July; in August fresh water is run through the field about once a week without being allowed to stand.
The autumn harvest is now at hand.

Such is the yearly cycle of rice/ winter grain cultivation by the natural method. The seeding and harvesting
so closely follow the natural pattern that it could be considered a natural process rather than an agricultural
technique.

It takes only an hour or two for one farmer to sow

the seeds and spread the straw across a quarter acre. With the exception of the job of harvesting, winter grain
can be grown single-handedly, and just two or three people can do all the work necessary to grow a field of rice
using only the traditional Japanese tools. There is probably no easier, simpler method for growing grain. It
involves little more than broadcasting seed and spreading straw, but -it has taken me over thirty years to reach
this simplicity.

This way of farming has evolved according to the natural conditions of the Japanese islands, but I feel that
natural farming could also be applied in other areas and to the raising of other indigenous crops. In areas where
water is not so readily available, for example, upland rice or other grains such as buckwheat, sorghum or millet

might be grown. Instead of white clover, another variety of clover, alfalfa, vetch

By December the winter grain sprouts through the straw, the rice seeds remain dormant until spring.

or lupine might prove a more suitable field cover. Natural farming takes a distinctive form in accordance with the
unique conditions of the area in which it is applied.

In making the transition to this kind of farming, some weeding, composting or pruning may be necessary at
first, but these measures should be gradually reduced each year. Ultimately, it is not the growing technique

which is the most important factor, but rather the state of mind of the farmer.

The winter grain is harvested in May. The rice seedlings are trampled by the feet of the harvesters but soon
recover.

Farming with Straw

Spreading straw might be considered rather unimportant, but it is fundamental to my method of growing rice
and winter grain. It is connected with everything, with fertility, with germination, with weeds, with keeping
away sparrows, with water management. In actual practice and in theory, the use of straw in farming is a crucial

issue. This is something that I cannot seem to get people to understand.

Spreading the Straw Uncut
The Okayama Testing Center is now trying direct seeding rice-growing in 80 percent of its experimental
fields. When I suggested that they scatter the straw uncut, they apparently thought this could not be right, and
ran the experiments after chopping it up with a mechanical shredder. When I went to visit the testing a few years
ago, I found that the fields had been divided into those using shredded straw, uncut straw, and no straw at all.
This is exactly what I did for a long time and since the uncut works best, it is uncut straw that I use.
Mr. Fujii, a teacher at Yasuki Agricultural High School in Shimane Prefecture, wanted to try direct seeding

and came to visit my farm. I suggested that he spread uncut straw over his field. He returned the

next year and reported that the test had failed. After listening carefully to his account, I found that he had laid
the straw down straight and neat like a Japanese backyard garden mulch. If you do it like that, the seeds will not
germinate well at all. With the straw of rye and barley, too, if it is spread too neatly the rice sprouts will have a
hard time getting through. It is best to toss the straw around every which way, just as though the stalks had
fallen naturally.

Rice straw works well as a mulch for winter grain, and the straw of winter grain works best for the rice. I
want this to be well understood. There are several diseases of rice which will infect the crop if fresh rice straw is
applied to the field. These diseases of rice will not infect the winter grain, however, and if the rice straw is
spread in the fall, it will be completely decomposed by the time the rice sprouts up the following spring. Fresh
rice straw is safe for other grains, as is buckwheat straw, and the straw of other grain species may be used for
rice and buckwheat. In general, fresh straw of winter grains, such as wheat, rye, and barley, should not be used
as mulch for other winter grains, as disease damage may result.

All of the straw and the hulls which remain after threshing the previous harvest should be returned to the
field.

Straw Enriches the Earth
Scattering straw maintains soil structure and enriches the earth so that prepared fertilizer becomes
unnecessary. This, of course, is connected with non-cultivation. My fields may be the only ones in Japan which
have not been plowed for over twenty years, and the quality of the soil improves with each season. I would

estimate that the surface layer, rich in humus, has become enriched to a depth of more than

four inches during these years. This is largely the result of returning to the soil everything grown in the field but

the grain itself.

No Need to Prepare Compost

There is no need to prepare compost. I will not say that you do not need compost-only that there is no need
to work hard making it. If straw is left lying on the surface of the field in the spring or fall and is covered with a
thin layer of chicken manure or duck droppings, in six months it will completely decompose.

To make compost by the usual method, the farmer works like crazy in the hot sun, chopping up the straw,
adding water and lime, turning the pile, and hauling it out to the field. He puts himself through all this grief
because he thinks it is a "better way." I would rather see people just scattering straw ox hulls or woodchips over
their fields.

Travelling along the Tokaido line in western Japan I have noticed that the straw is being cut more coarsely
than when I first started talking about spreading it uncut. I have to give the farmers credit. But the modern day
experts are still saying that it is best to use only so many hundred pounds of straw per quarter acre. Why don't
they say to put all the straw back in the field? Looking out the train window, you can see farmers who have cut
and scattered about half the straw and cast the rest aside to rot in the rain.

If all the farmers in Japan got together and started to put all the straw back on their fields, the result would

be an enormous amount of compost returned to the earth.

Germination

For hundreds of years farmers have taken great

Threshing the crop with the traditional pedal-powered rotating drum (Kyoto). The grains are then winnowed and
stored. The straw is returned to the fields.

care in preparing the seed beds for growing strong, healthy rice seedlings. The small beds were tidied up as if
they were the family altars. The earth was cultivated, sand and the ashes of burned rice hulls were spread all
around, and a prayer was offered that the seedlings would thrive.

It is not unreasonable, then, that the other villagers around here thought I was out of my mind to broadcast
seed while the winter grain was still standing in the field, with weeds and bits of decomposing straw scattered
everywhere.

Of course the seeds germinate well when sown directly onto a well-turned field, but if it rains and the field
turns to mud, you cannot go in and walk around, and the sowing must be postponed. The noncultivation method
is safe on this score, but on the other hand, there is trouble with small animals such as moles, crickets, mice, and
slugs who like to eat the seeds. The clay pellet enclosing the seed solves this problem.

In seeding winter grain, the usual method is to sow the seeds and then cover them with soil. If the seeds are
set in too deeply, they will rot. I used to drop the seeds into tiny holes in the soil, or into furrows without
covering them with soil, but I experienced many failures with both methods.

Lately I have gotten lazy and instead of making furrows or poking holes in the ground, I wrap the seeds in
clay pellets and toss them directly onto the field. Germination is best on the surface, where there is exposure to
oxygen. I have found that where these pellets are covered with straw, the seeds germinate well and will not rot

even in years of heavy rainfall.

Straw Helps to Cope
with Weeds and Sparrows

Ideally, one quarter acre will provide about 900 pounds of barley straw. If all of the straw is spread back
over the field, the surface will be completely covered. Even a troublesome weed such as crabgrass, the most
difficult problem in the direct seeding non-cultivation method, can be held under control.

Sparrows have caused me a lot of headaches. Direct seeding cannot succeed if there is no reliable way to
cope with the birds, and there are many places where direct seeding has been slow to spread for just this reason.
Many of you may have the same problem with sparrows, and you will know what I mean.

I can remember times when these birds followed right behind me and devoured all the seeds I had sown
even before I had a chance to finish planting the other side of the field. I tried scarecrows and nets and strings of
rattling cans, but nothing seemed to work very well. Or if one of these methods happened to work, its
effectiveness did not last more than a year or two.

My own experience has shown that by sowing the seed while the preceding crop is still in the field so that
they are hidden among grasses and clover, and by spreading a mulch of rice, rye, or barley straw as soon as the
mature crop has been harvested, the problem of sparrows can be dealt with most effectively.

I have made a lot of mistakes while experimenting over the years and have experienced failures of all kinds.
I probably know more about what can go wrong growing agricultural crops than anyone else in Japan. When I
succeeded for the first time in growing rice and winter grain with the non-cultivation method, I felt as joyful as

Columbus must have felt when he discovered America.

Growing Rice in a Dry Field

By the beginning of August, the rice plants in the neighbors' fields are already waist high, while the plants in
my fields are only about half that size. People who visit here toward the end of July are always skeptical, and
ask, "Fukuoka-san, is this rice going to turn out all right?" "Sure," I answer. "No need to worry."

I do not try to raise tall fast-growing plants with big leaves. Instead, I keep the plants as compact as possible.
Keep the head small, do not overnourish the plants, and let them grow true to the natural form of the rice plant.

Usually rice plants three or four feet tall produce luxuriant leaves and give the impression that the plant is
going to produce a lot of grain, but it is only the leafy stalks that are growing strongly. Starch production is great
but efficiency is low, and so much energy is expended in vegetative growth that not much is left to be stored in
the grains. For example, if tall; oversized plants yield 2,000 pounds of straw the yield of rice will be about
1,000-1,200 pounds. For small rice plants, such as those grown in my fields, 2,000 pounds of straw yields 2,000
pounds of rice. In a good harvest the yield of rice from my plants will reach about 2,400 pounds; that is, it will

be 20 percent heavier than the straw.

Rice plants grown in a dry field do not grow so tall. Sunlight is received uniformly, reaching to the base of
the plants and to the lower leaves. One square inch of leaf is enough to produce six grains of rice. Three or four
small leaves are more than enough to produce a hundred grains of rice to the head. I sow a bit thickly and wind
up with about 250-300 grain-bearing stalks (20 to 25 plants) per square yard. If you have many sprouts and do
not try to grow large plants, you can reap great harvests with no difficulty. This is also true for wheat, rye,
buckwheat, oats, millet, and other grains.

Of course the usual method is to keep several inches of water in the paddy throughout the growing season.
Farmers have been growing rice in water for so many centuries that most people believe that it cannot be grown
any other way. The cultivated varieties of "wet-field" rice are relatively strong if grown in a flooded field, but it
is not good for the plant to be grown in this way. Rice plants grow best when the water content in the soil is
between 60 and 80 percent of its water-holding capacity. When the field is not flooded plants develop stronger
roots and are extremely resistant to attacks by disease and insects.

The main reason for growing rice in a flooded field is to control the weeds by creating an environment in
which only a limited variety of weeds can survive. Those which do survive, however, must be pulled by hand or
uprooted with a hand weeding tool. By the traditional method, this time-consuming and backbreaking job must
be repeated several times in each growing season.

In June, during the monsoon season, I hold water in the field for about one week. Few of the dry-field weeds
can survive even so short a period without oxygen, and the clover also withers and turns yellow. The idea is not

to kill the clover, but only to weaken

it so as to allow the rice seedlings to get established. When the water is drained (as soon as possible/ the clover
recovers and spreads to cover the field's surface again beneath the growing rice plants. After that, I hardly do
anything in the way of water management. For the first half of the season, I do not irrigate at all. Even in years
when very little rain falls the soil stays moist below the layer of straw and green manure. In August I let in water
a little at a time but never allow it to stand.

If you show a rice plant from my field to a farmer he will know immediately that it looks as a rice plant

In June water is held in the field to weaken the weeds and clover and allow the rice to sprout through the ground
cover.

should and that it has the ideal shape. He will know that the seeds were sprouted naturally and not transplanted,
that the plant could not have been grown in a lot of water, and that chemical fertilizer was not applied. Any
farmer can tell these things as a matter of course by looking at the overall form of the plant, the shape of the
roots, and the spacing of the joints on the main stem. If you understand the ideal form, it is just a matter of how
to grow a plant of that shape under the unique conditions of your own field.

I do not agree with Professor Matsushima's idea that it is best when the fourth leaf from the tip of the plant
is the longest. Sometimes when the second or third leaf is the longest, you get the best results. If growth is held
back while the plant is young, the top leaf or the second leaf often becomes longest and a large harvest is still
obtained.

Professor Matsushima's theory is derived from experiments using fragile rice plants grown with fertilizer in
a nursery bed and later transplanted. My rice, on the other hand, was grown in accordance with the natural life
cycle of the rice plant, just as though it were growing wild. I wait patiently for the plant to develop and mature
at its own pace.

In recent years I have been trying out an old variety of glutinous rice from the south. Each seed, sown in fall,
produces an average of 12 stalks with about 250 grains per head. With this variety I believe I will one day be
able to reap a harvest close to the greatest theoretically obtainable from the solar energy reaching the field. In
some areas of my fields harvests of 27% bushels (1,650 pounds/ per quarter acre have already been realized with
this variety.

Seen with the doubting bye of the technician, my method of growing rice could be said to be a short term or

provisional result. "If the experiment were continued longer, some sort of problem would certainly

show up," he might say. But I have been growing rice in this manner for over twenty years. The yields continue

to increase and the soil becomes richer every year.

Orchard Trees

I also grow several varieties of citrus on the hillsides near my home. After the war, when I first began
farming, I started with 1*,acres of citrus orchard and 3/8 acre of rice fields, but now the citrus orchards alone
cover 12% acres. I came by this land by taking over surrounding hillsides which had been abandoned. I then
cleared them by hand.

The pine trees on several of those slopes had been clear-cut a few years earlier, and all I did was dig holes in
a contour line and plant the citrus seedlings. Sprouts had already appeared from the logged stumps and, as time
passed, Japanese pampas grass, cogon grass, and bracken began to thrive. The citrus tree seedlings became lost
in a tangle of vegetation.

I cut most of the pine sprouts, but allowed some to grow back for a windbreak. Then I cut back the thicket
growth and grassy ground cover and planted clover.

After six or seven years the citrus trees finally bore fruit. I dug away the earth behind the trees to form
terraces, and the orchard now appears little different from any other.

Of course I maintained the principles of not cultivating, not using chemical fertilizer, and not using

insecticides or weed killers. One interesting thing was that, at first, while the seedlings were growing

beneath the resprouted forest trees, there was no evidence of damaging insects such as the common arrowhead
scale. Once the thicket and resprouted trees were cut away, the land became less wild and more like an orchard.
Only then did these insects appear.

To allow a fruit tree to follow its natural form from the beginning is best. The tree will bear fruit every year
and there is no need to prune. A citrus tree follows the same pattern of growth as a cedar or pine, that is, a single
central trunk growing straight with branches spreading out alternately Of course all varieties of citrus do not
grow to exactly the same size and shape. The Hassaku and Shaddock varieties grow very tall, winter Unshu
mandarin orange trees are short and stocky, the early varieties of Satsuma mandarin orange trees are small at

maturity, but each has a single central trunk.

Do Not Kill the Natural Predators

I think that everyone knows that since the most common orchard "pests," ruby scale and horned wax scale,
have natural enemies, there is no need to apply insecticide to keep them under control. At one time the
insecticide Fusol was used in Japan. The natural predators were completely exterminated, and the resulting
problems still survive in many prefectures. From this experience I think most farmers have come to realize that
it is undesirable to eliminate predators because in the long run greater insect damage will result.

As for the mites and scales which do appear, if a solution of machine oil, a chemical relatively harmless to
the predators, is diluted 200 to 400 times and is sprayed lightly in midsummer, and the insect communities are

left to achieve their natural balance after

that, the problem will generally take care of itself. This will not work if an organic phosphorous pesticide has
already been used in June or July since the predators are also killed by this chemical.

I am not saying that I advocate the use of socalled harmless "organic" sprays such as salt-garlic solution or
machine oil emulsion, nor am I in favor of introducing foreign predator, species into the orchard to control
troublesome insects. Trees weaken and are attacked by insects to the extent that they deviate from the natural
form. If trees are growing along a pattern of unnatural development and are left abandoned in this state, the
branches become tangled and insect damage results. I have already told how I wiped out several acres of citrus
trees this way.

But if the trees are gradually corrected, they will return at-least approximately to their natural form. The
trees become stronger and measures to control insects become unnecessary. If a tree is planted carefully and
allowed to follow the natural form from the beginning, there is no need for pruning or sprays of any kind. Most
seedling trees have been pruned or their roots have been damaged at the nursery before they are transplanted to
the orchard, which makes pruning necessary right from the start.

In order to improve the orchard soil, I tried planting several varieties of trees. Among them was the
Morishima acacia. This tree grows year round, putting out new buds in, all seasons. The aphids which feed on
these buds began to multiply in great numbers. Lady bugs fed on the aphids and soon they too began to increase.
After the lady bugs had devoured all of the aphids, they climbed down to the citrus trees and started to feed on
other insects such as mites, arrowhead scales, and cottony-cushion scales.

Growing fruit without pruning, fertilizing, or using chemical sprays is possible only within a natural

environment.

Orchard Earth

It goes without saying that soil improvement is the fundamental concern of orchard management. If you use
chemical fertilizer the trees do grow larger, but year by year the soil becomes depleted. Chemical fertilizer
drains the earth of its vitality. If it is used even for one generation the soil suffers considerably.

There is no wiser course in farming than the path of wholesome soil improvement. Twenty years ago, the
face of this mountain was bare red clay, so hard you could not stick a shovel into it. A good deal of the land
around here was like that. People grew potatoes until the soil was exhausted and then the fields were left
abandoned. You might say that, rather than growing citrus and vegetables up here, I have been helping to restore
the fertility of the soil.

Let us talk about how I went about restoring those barren mountain slopes. After the war the technique of
deeply cultivating a citrus orchard and digging holes for adding organic matter was being encouraged. When I
returned from the testing center, I tried doing this in my own orchard. After a few years I came, to the
conclusion that this method is not only physically exhausting, but, as far as improving the soil is concerned, is
just plain useless.

At first I buried straw and ferns which I had brought down from the mountain. Carrying loads of

90 pounds and more was a big job, but after two or three years there was not even enough humus to scoop up in

my hand. The trenches I had dug to bury the organic matter caved in and turned into open pits.

Next I tried burying wood. It seems that straw would be the best aid for improving the soil, but judging from

the amount of soil formed, wood is better. This is fine as long as there are trees to cut. But for

“Twenty years ago the face of this mountains was bare red clay so hard you could not stick a shovel into it.”

someone without trees nearby, it is better to grow the wood right in the orchard than to haul it from a distance.

In my orchard there are pines and cedar trees, a few pear trees, persimmons, loquats, Japanese cherries, and
many other native varieties growing among the citrus trees. One of the most interesting trees, though not a
native, is the Morishima acacia. This is the same tree I mentioned earlier in connection with lady bugs and
natural predator protection. The wood is hard, the flowers attract bees, and the leaves are good for fodder. It
helps to prevent insect damage in the orchard, acts as a windbreak, and the rhizobium bacteria living within the
roots fertilize the soil.

This tree was introduced to Japan from Australia some years ago and grows faster than any tree I have ever
seen. It sends out a deep root in just a few months and in six or seven years it stands as tall as a telephone pole.
In addition, this tree is a nitrogen fixer, so if 6 to 10 trees are planted to the quarter acre, soil improvement can
be carried out in the deep soil strata and there is no need to break your back hauling logs down the mountain.

As for the surface layer of the soil, I sowed a mixture of white clover and alfalfa on the barren ground. It
was several years before they could take hold, but finally they came up and covered the orchard hillsides. I also
planted Japanese, radish (daikon). The roots of this hearty vegetable penetrate deeply into the soil, adding
organic matter and opening channels for air and water circulation. It reseeds itself easily and after one sowing
you can almost forget about it.

As the soil became richer, the weeds started to make a comeback. After seven or eight years, the clover

almost disappeared among the weeds, so I tossed out a little more clover seed in late summer after

cutting back the weeds [During the summer Mr. Fukuoka cuts the weeds, briers, and tree sprouts growing
beneath the orchard trees with a scythe.] As a result of this thick weed/ clover cover, over the past twenty-five
years, the surface layer of the orchard soil, which had been hard red clay, has become loose, dark colored, and
rich with earthworms and organic matter.

With the green manure fertilizing the topsoil and the roots of the Morishima acacia improving the soil deep
down, you can do quite well without fertilizer and there is no need to cultivate between the orchard trees. With
tall trees for windbreaks, citrus in the middle, and a green manure cover below, I have found a way to take it

easy and let the orchard manage itself.

Growing Vegetables Like Wild Plants

Next let us talk about growing vegetables. One can either use a backyard garden to supply kitchen
vegetables for the household or else grow vegetables on open, unused land.

For the backyard garden it is enough to say that you should grow the right vegetables at the right time in soil
prepared by organic compost and manure. The method of growing vegetables for the kitchen table in old Japan
blended well with the natural pattern of life. Children play under fruit trees in the backyard. Pigs eat scraps from
the kitchen and root around in the soil. Dogs bark and play and the farmer sows seeds in the rich earth. Worms
and insects grow up with the vegetables, chickens peck at the worms and lay eggs for the children to eat.

The typical rural family in Japan grew vegetables in this way until not more than twenty years ago.

Plant disease was prevented by growing the traditional crops at the right time, keeping the soil healthy by
returning all organic residues to the soil, and rotating crops. Harmful insects were picked off by hand, and also
pecked by chickens. In southern Shikoku there was a kind of chicken that would eat worms and insects on the
vegetables without scratching the roots or damaging the plants.

Some people may be skeptical at first about using

animal manure and human waste, thinking it primitive or dirty. Today people want "clean" vegetables, so
farmers grow them in hothouses without using soil at all. Gravel culture, sand culture, and hydroponics are
getting more popular all the time. The vegetables are grown with chemical nutrients and by light which is
filtered through a vinyl covering. It is strange that people have come to think of these vegetables grown
chemically as "clean" and safe to eat. Foods grown in soil balanced by the action of worms, microorganisms,
and decomposing animal manure are the cleanest and most wholesome of all.

In growing vegetables in a "semi-wild" way, making use of a vacant lot, riverbank or open wasteland, my
idea is to just toss out the seeds and let the vegetables grow up with the weeds. I grow my vegetables on the
mountainside in the spaces between the citrus trees.

The important thing is knowing the right time to plant. For the spring vegetables the right time is when the
winter weeds are dying back and just before the summer weeds have sprouted [ This method of growing
vegetables has been developed by Mr. Fukuoka by trial and experiment in accordance with local conditions.
Where he lives there are dependable spring rains, and a climate warm enough to grow vegetables in all seasons.
Over the years he has come to know which vegetables can be grown among which weeds and the kind of care
each requires.

In most parts of North America the specific method Mr. Fukuoka uses for growing vegetables would be
impractical. It is up to each farmer who would grow vegetables in the semi-wild manner to develop a technique
appropriate to the land and the natural vegetation.] For the fall sowing, seeds should be tossed out when the

summer grasses are fading away and the winter weeds have not yet appeared.

It is best to wait for a rain which is likely to last

for several days. Cut a swath in the weed cover and put out the vegetable seeds. There is no need to cover them
with soil; just lay the weeds you have cut back over the seeds to act as a mulch and to hide them from the birds
and chickens until they can germinate. Usually the weeds must be cut back two or three times in order to give
the vegetable seedlings a head start, but sometimes just once is enough.

Where the weeds and clover are not so thick, you can simply toss out the seeds. The chickens will eat some
of them, but many will germinate. If you plant in a row or furrow, there is a chance that beetles or other insects
will devour many of the seeds. They walk in a straight line. Chickens also spot a patch which has been cleared
and come to scratch around. It is my experience that it is best to scatter the seeds here and there.

Vegetables grown in this way are stronger than most people think. If they sprout up before the weeds, they
will not be overgrown later on. There are some vegetables, such as spinach and carrots, which do not germinate
easily. Soaking the seeds in water for a day or two, then wrapping them in a little clay pellet, should solve the
problem.

If sown a bit heavily, Japanese radish, turnips, and various leafy green autumn vegetables will be strong
enough to compete successfully with the winter and early spring weeds. A few always go unharvested, reseeding
themselves year after year. They have a unique flavor and make very interesting eating.

It is an amazing sight to see many unfamiliar vegetables thriving here and there on the mountain. Japanese
radishes and turnips grow half in the soil and half above the surface. Carrots and burdock often grow short and
fat with many root hairs, and I believe their tart, slightly bitter flavor is that of their original wild predecessors.

Garlic, Japanese pearl onions, and

Chinese leeks, once planted, will come up by themselves year after year.

Legumes are best sown in spring. Cowpeas and kidney beans are easy to grow and give high yields. In
growing peas, red azuki beans, soy beans, pinto beans, and kidney beans, early germination is essential. They
will have difficulty germinating without enough rain, and you must keep an eye out for birds and insects.

Tomatoes and eggplants are not strong enough to compete with the weeds when they are young, and so
should be grown in a starter bed and later transplanted. Instead of staking them up, let the tomatoes run along
the ground. Roots will grow down from the nodes along the main stem and new shoots will come up and bear
fruit.

As for the cucumbers, the creeping-on-the-ground variety is best. You have to take care of the young plants,
occasionally cutting the weeds, but after that, the plants will grow strong. Lay out bamboo, or the branches of a
tree and the cucumbers will twine all over them. The branches keep the fruit just above the ground so that it
does not rot.

This method of growing cucumbers also works for melons and squash.

Potatoes and taros are very strong plants. Once planted they will come up in the same place every year and
never be overgrown by weeds. Just leave a few in the ground when you harvest. If the soil is hard, grow
Japanese radish first. As their roots grow they cultivate and soften the earth and after a few seasons, potatoes
can be grown in their place.

I have found white clover useful in holding back weeds. It grows thickly and can smother out even strong
weeds such as mugwort and crabgrass. If the clover is sown mixed with the vegetable seeds, it will act as a

living mulch, enriching the soil, and keeping the ground moist and well aerated.

As with vegetables, it is important to choose the right time to sow the clover seed. Late summer or fall
sowing is best; the roots develop during the cold months, giving the clover a jump on the annual spring grasses.
The clover will also do well if sown early in spring. Either broadcasting or planting in rows about twelve inches
apart is fine. Once the clover takes hold, you do not need to sow it again for five or six years.

The main aim of this semi-wild vegetable growing is to grow crops as naturally as possible on land which
would otherwise be left unused. If you try to use improved techniques or to get bigger yields the attempt will
end in failure. In most cases the failure will be caused by insects or diseases. If various kinds of herbs and
vegetables are mixed together and grown among the natural vegetation, damage by insects and diseases will be
minimal and there will be no need to use sprays or to pick bugs off by hand.

You can grow vegetables anyplace there is a varied and vigorous growth of weeds. It is important to become
familiar with the yearly cycle and growing pattern of the weeds and grasses. By looking at the variety and the
size of the weeds in a certain area you can tell what kind of soil is there and whether or not a deficiency exists.

In my orchard I grow burdock, cabbage, tomatoes, carrots, mustard, beans, turnips and many other kinds of

herbs and vegetables in this semi-wild way.

The Terms for Abandoning Chemicals

Today Japanese rice growing stands at an important crossroads. Farmers and specialists are confused as to
which path to follow-to continue paddy transplanting, or to move over to direct seeding, and if the latter, to
choose cultivation or non-cultivation. I have been saying for the past twenty years that direct seeding
non-cultivation will eventually prove to be the best way. The speed with which direct seeding is already
spreading in Okayama Prefecture is eye-opening.

There are those, however, who say that turning to a non-chemical agriculture to supply the nation's food is
unthinkable. They say that chemical treatments must be used to control the three great rice diseases-stem rot,
rice blast disease, and bacterial leaf blight. But if farmers would stop using weak, "improved" seed varieties,
stop adding too much nitrogen to the soil, and reduce the amount of irrigation water so that strong roots could
develop, these diseases would all but disappear and chemical sprays would become unnecessary.

At first, the red clay soil in my fields was weak and unsuited for growing rice. Brown spot disease fre-
quently occurred. But as the field gradually grew in fertility, the incidence of brown spot disease decreased.

Lately there have been no outbreaks at all.

With insect damage the situation is the same. The most important thing is not to kill the natural predators.
Keeping the field ‘continuously under water or irrigating with stagnant or polluted water will also lead to insect
problems. The most troublesome insect pests, summer and fall leaf-hoppers, can be kept under control by
keeping water out of the field.

Green rice leaf-hoppers, living in the weeds over the winter, may become a virus host. If this happens the
result is often a loss of ten to twenty percent from rice blast disease. If chemicals are not sprayed, however,
there will be many spiders present in the field and one can generally leave the work to them. Spiders are
sensitive to even the slightest human tampering and care must always be taken on this account.

Most people think that if chemical fertilizer and insecticides were abandoned agricultural yields would fall
to a fraction of the present level. Experts on insect damage estimate that losses in the first year after giving up
insecticides would be about five percent. Loss of another five percent in abandoning chemical fertilizer would
probably not be far mistaken.

That is, if the use of water in the rice field were curtailed, and the chemical fertilizer and pesticide spraying
encouraged by the Agricultural Co-op were abandoned, the average losses in the first year would probably reach
about ten percent. The recuperative power of nature is great beyond imagining and after this initial loss, I
believe harvests would increase and eventually surpass their original level.

While I was with the Kochi Testing Station, I carried out experiments in the prevention of stem borers.
These insects enter and feed on the stem of the rice plant, causing the stalk to turn white and wither. The method

of estimating the damage is simple: you count how many white stalks or rice there are. Ina

hundred plants, ten or twenty percent of the stalks may be white. In severe cases, when it appears as though the
whole crop has been ruined, the actual damage is about thirty percent.

To try to avoid this loss, one field of rice was sprayed with insecticide to kill the stem borers; another field
was left untreated. When the results were calculated it turned out that the untreated field with many withered
stalks had the higher yield. At first I could not believe it myself and thought it was an experimental error. But
the data appeared to be accurate, so I investigated further.

What happened was that by attacking the weaker plants the stem borers produced a kind of thinning effect.
The withering of some stems left more room for the rest of the plants. Sunlight was then able to penetrate to the
lower leaves. These remaining rice plants grew more strongly as a result, sent up more grain-bearing stalks, and
produced more grains to the head than they could have without the thinning. When the density of stalks is too
great and insects do not thin out the excess, the plants look healthy enough, but in many cases the harvest is
actually lower.

Looking at the many research testing center reports you can find the results of using practically every
chemical spray on record. But it is generally not realized that only half of these results are reported. Of course
there is no intention of hiding anything, but when the results are published by the chemical companies as in
advertisements, it is the same as if the conflicting data had been concealed. Results which show lower yields, as
in the experiment with the stem borers, are checked off as experimental discrepancies and discarded. There are,
of course, cases in which insect extermination results in increased yields, but there are other cases in which the

yield is

reduced. Reports of the latter rarely appear in print.

Among agricultural chemicals, herbicides are probably the most difficult to dissuade farmers from using.
Since ancient times the farmer has been afflicted with what might be termed "the battle against the weeds."
Plowing, cultivating between the rows, the ritual of rice transplanting itself, all are mainly aimed at eliminating
weeds. Before the development of herbicides, a farmer had to walk many miles through the flooded rice fields
each season, pushing a weeding tool up and down the rows and pulling weeds by hand. It is easy to understand
why these chemicals were received as a godsend. In the use of straw and clover and the temporary flooding of
the fields, I have found a simple way to control weeds without either the hot, hard labor of weeding or the use of

chemicals.

A mudwalled hut in the orchard.

Limits of the Scientific Method

Before researchers become researchers they should become philosophers. They should consider what the
human goal is, what it is that humanity should create. Doctors should first determine at the fundamental level
what it is that human beings depend on for life.

In applying my theories to farming, I have been experimenting in growing my crops in various ways, always
with the idea of developing a method close to nature. I have done this by whittling away unnecessary
agricultural practices.

Modern scientific agriculture, on the other hand, has no such vision. Research wanders about aimlessly,
each researcher seeing just one part of the infinite array of natural factors which affect harvest yields.
Furthermore, these natural factors change from place to place and from year to year.

Even though it is the same quarter acre, the farmer must grow his crops differently each year in accordance
with variations in weather, insect populations, the condition of the soil, and many other natural factors. Nature is
everywhere in perpetual motion; conditions are never exactly the same in any two years.

Modern research divides nature into tiny pieces and conducts tests that conform neither with natural

law nor with practical experiences. The results are arranged for the convenience of research, not according to
the needs of the farmer. To think that these conclusions can be put to use with invariable success in the farmer's
field is a big mistake.

Recently Professor Tsuno of Ehime University wrote a lengthy book on the relationship of plant metabolism
to rice harvests. This professor often comes to my field, digs down a few feet to check the soil, brings students
along to measure the angle of sunlight and shade and whatnot, and takes plant specimens back to the lab for
analysis. I often ask him, "When you go back, are you going to try non-cultivation direct seeding?" He
laughingly answers, "No, I'll leave the applications to you. I'm going to stick to research."

So that is how it is. You study the function of the plant's metabolism and its ability to absorb nutrients from
the soil, write a book, and get a doctorate in agricultural science. But do not ask if your theory of assimilation is
going to be relevant to the yield.

Even if you can explain how metabolism affects the productivity of the top leaf when the average
temperature is eighty-four degrees /Fahrenheit/, there are places where the temperature is not eighty-four
degrees. And if the temperature is eighty-four degrees in Ehime this year, next year it may only be seventy five
degrees. To say that simply stepping up metabolism will increase starch formation and produce a large harvest is
a mistake. The geography and topography of the land, the condition of the soil, its structure, texture, and
drainage, exposure to sunlight, insect relationships, the variety of seed used, the method of cultivation-truly an
infinite variety of factors-must all be considered. A scientific testing method which takes all relevant factors into

account is an impossibility.

You hear a lot of talk these days about the benefits of the "Good Rice Movement" and the "Green
Revolution." Because these methods depend on weak, "improved" seed varieties, it becomes necessary for the
farmer to apply chemicals and insecticides eight or ten times during the growing season. In a short time the soil
is burned clean of microorganisms and organic matter. The life of the soil is destroyed and crops come to be
dependent on nutrients added from the outside in the form of chemical fertilizer.

It appears that things go better, when the farmer applies "scientific" techniques, but this does not mean that
science must come to the rescue because the natural fertility is inherently insufficient. It means that rescue is
necessary because the natural fertility has been destroyed.

By spreading straw, growing clover, and returning to the soil all organic residues, the earth comes to possess
all the nutrients needed to grow rice and winter grain in the same field year after year. By natural farming, fields
that have already been damaged by cultivation or the use of agricultural chemicals can be effectively

rehabilitated.



One Farmer Speaks Out

There is a great deal of concern in Japan these days, and justifiably so, about the deteriorating quality of the
environment and the resulting contamination of food. Citizens have organized boycotts and large demonstrations
to protest the indifference of political and industrial leaders. But all of this activity, if carried out in the present
spirit, only results in wasted effort. To talk about cleaning up specific cases of pollution is like treating
symptoms of a disease while the root cause of the malady continues to fester.

Two years ago, for instance, a conference for the purpose of discussing pollution was organized by the
Agricultural Management Research Center, together with the Organic Agricultural Council and the Nada Co-op.
The chairman of the conference was Mr. Teruo Ichiraku, who is head of the Japanese Organic Farmers
Association, and is also one of the most powerful figures in the government's Agricultural Co-op. The
recommendations of this agency as to which crops and seed varieties should be grown, how much fertilizer
should be used and which chemicals should be applied are followed by nearly every village farmer in Japan.

Because such a diversity of influential people were taking part, I attended with hopes that far

reaching action could be decided upon and put into effect.

From the standpoint of publicizing the food pollution problem, this conference could be said to have been
successful. But like the other meetings, the discussions degenerated into a series of highly technical reports by
research specialists and personal accounts of the horrors of food contamination. No one seemed willing to
address the problem at its fundamental level.

In a discussion of mercury poisoning of tuna, for example, the representative of the Fisheries Bureau first
spoke of how truly frightening the problem had become. At that time mercury pollution was being discussed
every day on the radio and in the newspapers, and so everyone listened closely to hear what he had to say.

The speaker said that the amount of mercury in the bodies of tuna, even those taken in the Antarctic Ocean
and near the North Pole, was extremely high. However, when a laboratory specimen taken several hundred years
ago was dissected and analyzed, this fish, contrary to expectation, also obtained mercury. His tentative
conclusion suggested that mercury consumption was necessary for the fish to live.

The people in the audience looked at each other in disbelief. The purpose of the meeting was supposed to
have been to determine how to deal with the pollution which had already contaminated the environment, and to
take measures to correct it. Instead, here was this representative from the Fisheries Bureau saying that mercury
is necessary for the tuna's survival. This is what I mean when I say that people do not grasp the root cause of

pollution but only see it from a narrow and superficial perspective.

I stood up and suggested that we take joint action to set up, then and there, a concrete plan to deal with

pollution. Would it not be better to talk straightforwardly about discontinuing the use of the chemicals which are
causing the pollution? Rice, for example can be grown very well without chemicals, as can citrus, and it is not
difficult to grow vegetables that way either. I said that it could be done, and that I had been doing it on my farm
for years, but that as long as the government continued to endorse the use of chemicals, no one else would give
clean farming a try.

Members of the Fisheries Bureau were present at the meeting, as were people from the Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry and the Agricultural Co-op. If they and the chairman of the conference, Mr. Ichiraku,
had really wanted to get things going and had suggested that farmers throughout the country should try growing
rice without chemicals, sweeping changes could have been made.

There was one great problem, however. If crops were to be grown without agricultural chemicals, fertilizer,
or machinery, the giant chemical companies would become unnecessary and the government's Agricultural
Co-op Agency would collapse. To put the matter right out front, I said that the Co-ops and the modern
agricultural policymakers depend on large capital investment in fertilizer and agricultural machinery for their
base of power. To do away with machinery and chemicals would bring about a complete change in the economic
and social structures. Therefore, I could see no way that Mr. Ichiraku, the Co-ops or the government officials
could speak out in favor of measures to clean up pollution.

When I spoke out in this way, the chairman said, "Mr. Fukuoka, you are upsetting the conference with your

remarks," shutting my mouth for me. Well, that's what happened.

A Modest Solution
to a Difficult Problem

So it appears that government agencies have no intention of stopping pollution. A second difficulty is that
all aspects of the problem of food pollution must be brought together and solved at the same time. A problem
cannot be solved by people who are concerned with only one or another of its parts.

To the extent that the consciousness of everyone is not fundamentally transformed, pollution will not cease.

For example, the farmer thinks that the Inland Sea [The small sea between the islands of Honshu, Kyushu
and Shikoku] is of no concern to him. He thinks that it is the officials of the Fisheries Bureau whose business it
is to look after fish, and that it is the job of the Environmental Council to take care of ocean pollution. In this
way of thinking lies the problem.

The most commonly used chemical fertilizers, ammonium sulfate, urea, super phosphate and the like, are
used in large amounts, only fractions of which are absorbed by the plants in the field. The rest leaches into
streams and rivers, eventually flowing into the Inland Sea. These nitrogen compounds become food for algae

and plankton which multiply in great numbers, causing the red tide to appear. Of

course, industrial discharge of mercury and other contaminating wastes also contribute to the pollution, but for
the most part water pollution in Japan comes from agricultural chemicals.

So it is the farmer who must shoulder major responsibility for the red tide. The farmer who applies polluting
chemicals to his field, the corporations who manufacture these chemicals; the village officials who believe in
the convenience of chemicals and offer technical guidance accordingly-if each of these people does not ponder
the problem deeply there will be no solving the question of water pollution.

As it is now, only those who are most directly affected become active in trying to cope with pollution
problems, as in the case of the local fishermen's struggle against the big oil companies after the oil spill near
Mizushima. Or else some professor proposes to cope with the problem by opening a channel through the belly of
Shikoku Island to let the relatively clean water of the Pacific Ocean flow into the Inland Sea. This sort of thing
is researched and attempted time after time, but a true solution can never come about in this way.

The fact of the matter is that whatever we do, the situation gets worse. The more elaborate the coun-

termeasures, the more complicated the problems become.

Suppose a pipe were laid across Shikoku and water were pumped up from the Pacific and poured into the
Inland Sea. Let us say that this may possibly clean up the Inland Sea. But where is the electric power going to
come from to run the factory which will manufacture the steel pipe, and how about the power required to pump
the water up? A nuclear power plant would become necessary. To construct such a system, concrete and all the

various materials must be assembled, and a uranium processing center

built as well. When solutions develop in this way, they only sow the seeds for second and third generation
pollution problems which will be more difficult than the previous ones, and more widespread.

It is like the case of the greedy farmer who opens the irrigation inlet too wide and lets the water come
rushing into his rice paddy. A crack develops and the ridge crumbles away. At this point reinforcement work
becomes necessary. The walls are strengthened and the irrigation channel enlarged. The increased volume of
water only increases the potential danger, and the next time the ridge weakens, even greater effort will be
required for reconstruction.

When a decision is made to cope with the symptoms of a problem, it is generally assumed that the corrective
measures will solve the problem itself. They seldom do. Engineers cannot seem to get this through their heads.
These countermeasures are all based on too narrow a definition of what is wrong. Human measures and
countermeasures proceed from limited scientific truth and judgment. A true solution can never come about in
this way. [By "limited scientific truth and judgment," Mr. Fukuoka is referring to the world as perceived and
constructed by the human intellect. He considers this perception to be limited to a framework defined by its own
assumptions. ]

My modest solutions, such as spreading straw and growing clover, create no pollution. They are effective
because they eliminate the source of the problem. Until the modern faith in big technological solutions can be

overturned, pollution will only get worse.

The Fruit of Hard Times

Consumers generally assume that they have nothing to do with causing agricultural pollution. Many of them
ask for food that has not been chemically treated. But chemically treated food is marketed mainly in response to
the preferences of the consumer. The consumer demands large, shiny, unblemished produce of regular shape. To
satisfy these desires, agricultural chemicals which were not used five or six years ago have come rapidly into

use.

How did we get into such a predicament? People say they do not care if cucumbers are straight or crooked,

and that fruit does not necessarily have to be beautiful on the outside. But take a look inside the wholesale
markets in Tokyo sometime if you want to see how the price responds to consumer preferences. When the fruit
looks just a little better, you get a premium of five or ten cents a pound. When the fruit is classed "Small,"
"Medium" or "Large," the price per pound may double or triple with each increase in size.

The consumer's willingness to pay high prices for food produced out of season has also contributed to the
increased use of artificial growing methods and chemicals. Last year, Unshu mandarin oranges grown in

hothouses for summer shipment [this fruit ripens naturally late in the fall] fetched prices

ten to twenty times higher than seasonal mandarins. Instead of the usual price of 10 to 15 cents per pound,
outrageous prices of $.80, $1.00, even $1.75 to the pound were paid. And so, if you invest several thousand
dollars to install the equipment, buy the necessary fuel, and work the extra hours, you can realize a profit.

Farming out of season is becoming more and more popular all the time. To have mandarin oranges just one
month earlier, the people in the city seem happy enough to pay for the farmer's extra investment in labor and
equipment. But if you ask how important it is for human beings to have this fruit a month earlier, the truth is that
it is not important at all, and money is not the only price paid for such indulgence.

Furthermore, a coloring agent, not used a few years ago, is now being used. With this chemical, the fruit
becomes fully colored one week earlier. Depending on whether the fruit is sold a week before or after the 10" of
October, the price either doubles or falls by half, so the farmer applies color-accelerating chemicals, and after
the harvest places the fruit in a ripening room for gas treatment.

But when the fruit is shipped out early, it is not sweet enough, and so artificial sweeteners are used. It is
generally thought that chemical sweeteners have been prohibited, but the artificial sweetener sprayed on citrus
trees has not been specifically outlawed. The question is whether or not it falls into the category of "agricultural
chemicals." In any case, almost everybody is using it.

The fruit is then taken to the co-op fruit-sorting center. In order to separate the fruit into large and small
sizes, each one is sent rolling several hundred yards down a long conveyor. Bruising is common. The larger the

sorting center, the longer the fruit is bounced and tumbled about. After a water washing

the mandarin oranges are sprayed with preservatives and a coloring agent is brushed on. Finally, as a finishing
touch, a paraffin wax solution is applied and the fruit is polished to a glossy shine. Nowadays fruit is really "run
through the mill."

So from the time just before the fruit has been harvested to the time it is shipped out and put on the display
counter, five or six chemical's are used. This is not to mention the chemical fertilizers and sprays that were used
while the crops were growing in the orchard. And this is all because the consumer wants to buy fruit just a little
more attractive. This little edge of preference has put the farmer in a real predicament.

These measures are not taken because the farmer likes to work this way, or because the officials of the
Ministry of Agriculture enjoy putting the farmer through all this extra labor, but until the general sense of values
changes, the situation will not improve.

When I was with the Yokohama Customs Office forty years ago, Sunkist lemons and oranges were being
handled in this way. I was strongly opposed to introducing this system to Japan, but my words could not prevent
the current system from being adopted.

If one farm household or co-op takes up a new process such as the waxing of mandarin oranges, because of
the extra care and attention the profit is higher. The other agricultural co-ops take notice and soon they, too,
adopt the new process. Fruit which is not wax-treated no longer brings so high a price. In two or three years
waxing is taken up all over the country. The competition then brings the prices down, and all that is left to the
farmer is the burden of hard work and the added costs of supplies and equipment. Now he must apply the wax.

Of course the consumer suffers as a result. Food

that is not fresh can be sold because it /ooks fresh. Speaking biologically, fruit in a slightly shriveled state is
holding its respiration and energy consumption down to the lowest possible level. It is like a person in
meditation: his metabolism, respiration, and calorie consumption reach an extremely low level. Even if he fasts,
the energy within the body will be conserved. In the same way, when mandarin oranges grow wrinkled, when
fruit shrivels, when vegetables wilt, they are in the state that will preserve their food value for the longest
possible time.

It is a mistake to try to maintain the mere appearance of freshness, as when shopkeepers sprinkle water on
their vegetables over and over again. Although the vegetables are kept looking fresh, their *' flavor and
nutritional value soon deteriorate.

At any rate, all the agricultural cooperatives and collective sorting centers have been integrated and
expanded to carry out such unnecessary activities. This is called "modernization." The produce is packed and
loaded onto the great delivery system and shipped off to the consumer.

To say it in a word, until there is a reversal of the sense of values which cares more for size and appearance

than for quality, there will be no solving the problem of food pollution.

The Marketing of Natural Food

For the past several years I have sent 88 to 110 bushels (5,000-6,500 pounds) of rice to natural food stores in
various parts of the country. I have also shipped 400 thirty-five-pound cartons of mandarin oranges in ten-ton
trucks to the co-op living association in Tokyo's Suginami district. The chairman of the co-op wanted to sell
unpolluted produce, and this formed the basis of our agreement.

The first year was quite successful but there were also some complaints. The size of the fruit was too varied,
the exterior was a bit dirty, the skin was sometimes shriveled and so on. I had shipped the fruit in plain
unmarked cartons, and there were some people who suspected, without reason, that the fruit was just an
assortment of "seconds." I now pack the fruit in cartons lettered "natural mandarins."

Since natural food can be produced with the least expense and effort, I reason that it should be sold at the
cheapest price. Last year, in the Tokyo area, my fruit was the lowest priced of all. According to many
shopkeepers the flavor was the most delicious. It would be best, of course, if the fruit could be sold locally,
eliminating the time and expense involved in shipping, but even so, the price was right, the fruit was free of

chemicals and it tasted good. This year I have been asked to ship two or three times as much as before.

At this point the question arises as to how far the direct sale of natural food can spread. I have one hope in
this regard. Lately chemical fruit growers have been driven into an extremely tight economic pinch, and this
makes the production of natural food more attractive to them. No matter how hard the average farmer works
applying chemicals, coloring, waxing, and so on, he can only sell his fruit for a price that will barely cover
expenses. This year, even a farm with exceptionally fine fruit can only expect to realize a profit of less than five
cents per pound: The farmer producing slightly lower quality fruit will end up with nothing at all.

Since prices have slumped in the past few years, the agricultural co-ops and sorting centers have become
very strict, selecting fruit of only the very highest quality. Inferior fruit cannot be sold to the sorting centers.
After putting in a full day's work in the orchard harvesting the mandarin oranges, loading them into boxes, and
carrying them to the sorting shed, the farmer must work until eleven or twelve o'clock at night, picking over his
fruit, one by one, keeping only those of perfect size and shape [the rejected fruit is sold for about half price to a
private company to be squeezed for juice. ]

The "good ones" sometimes average only 25% to 50% of the total crop, and even some of these are rejected
by the co-op. If the profit remaining is a mere two or three cents per pound, it is considered pretty good. The
poor citrus farmer is working hard these days and still barely breaking even.

Growing fruit without applying chemicals, using fertilizer, or cultivating the soil involves less expense, and
the farmer's net profit is therefore higher. The fruit I ship out is practically unsorted; I just pack the fruit into a

box, send them off to the market, and get to bed early.

The other farmers in my neighborhood realize that they are working very hard only to end up with nothing
in their pockets. The feeling is growing that there is nothing strange about growing natural food products, and
the producers are ready for a change to farming without chemicals. But until natural food can be distributed
locally, the average farmer will worry about not having a market in which to sell his produce.

As for the consumer, the common belief has been that natural food should be expensive. If it is not ex-
pensive, people suspect that it is not natural food. One retailer remarked to me that no one would buy natural
produce unless it is priced high.

I still feel that natural food should be sold more cheaply than any other. Several years ago I was asked to
send the honey gathered in the citrus orchard and the eggs laid by the hens on the mountain to a natural food
store in Tokyo. When I found out that the merchant was selling them at extravagant prices, I was furious. I knew
that a merchant who would take advantage of his customers in that way would also mix my rice with other rice
to increase the weight, and that it, too, would reach the consumer at an unfair price. I immediately stopped all
shipments to that store.

Ifa high price is charged for natural food, it means that the merchant is taking excessive profits.
Furthermore, if natural foods are expensive, they become luxury foods and only rich people are able to afford
them.

If natural food is to become widely popular, it must be available locally at a reasonable price. If the
consumer will only adjust to the idea that low prices do not mean that the food is not natural, then everyone will

begin thinking in the right direction.

Commercial Agriculture Will Fail

When the concept of commercial agriculture first appeared, I opposed it. Commercial agriculture in Japan is
not profitable for the farmer. Among merchants the rule is that if an article which originally costs a certain
amount is further processed, an extra cost is added when the article is sold. But in Japanese agriculture it is not
so straightforward. Fertilizer, feed, equipment, and chemicals are purchased at prices fixed abroad, and there is
no telling what the actual cost per pound will be when these imported products are used. It is completely up to
the merchants. And with selling prices also fixed, the farmer's income is at the mercy of forces beyond his
control.

In general, commercial agriculture is an unstable proposition. The farmer would do much better by growing
the food he needs without thinking about making money. If you plant one grain of rice, it becomes more than
one thousand grains. One row of turnips makes enough pickles for the entire winter. If you follow this line of
thought, you will have enough to eat, more than enough; without struggling. But if you decide to try to make

money instead, you get on board the profit wagon, and it runs away with you.

I have been thinking lately about white leghorns. Because the improved variety of white leghorn lays

over 200 days a year, raising them for profit is considered good business. When raised commercially these
chickens are cooped up in long rows of small cages not unlike cells in a penitentiary, and through their entire
lives their feet are never allowed to touch the ground. Disease is common and the birds are pumped full of
antibiotics and fed a formula diet of vitamins and hormones.

It is said that the local chickens that have been kept since ancient times, the brown and black shamo and
chabo, have only half the egg-laying capacity. As a result these birds have all but disappeared in Japan. I let two
hens and one rooster loose to run wild on the mountainside and after one year there were twenty-four. When it
seemed that few eggs were being laid, the local birds were busy raising chickens.

In the first year, the leghorn has a greater egg-laying efficiency than the local chickens, but after one year
the white leghorn is exhausted and cast aside, whereas the shamo we started with has become ten healthy birds

running about beneath the orchard

Setting out for a day’s work.

trees. Furthermore, the white leghorns lay well because they are raised on artificially enriched feed which is
imported from foreign countries and must be bought from the merchants. The local birds scratch around and
feed freely on seeds and insects in the area and lay delicious, natural eggs.

If you think commercial vegetables are nature's own, you are in for a big surprise. These vegetables are a
watery chemical concoction of nitrogen, phosphorous, and potash, with a little help from the seed. And that is
just how they taste. And commercial chicken eggs (you can call them eggs if you like) are nothing more than a
mixture of synthetic feed, chemicals, and hormones. This is not a product of nature but a man made synthetic in
the shape of an egg. The farmer who produces vegetables and eggs of this kind, I call a manufacturer.

Now if it is manufacturing you are talking about, you will have to do some fancy figuring if you want to
make a profit. Since the commercial farmer is not making any money, he is like a merchant who cannot handle
the abacus. That sort of fellow is regarded as a fool by other people and his profits are soaked up by politicians
and salesmen.

In olden times there were warriors, farmers, craftsmen, and merchants. Agriculture was said to be closer to
the source of things than trade or manufacturing, and the farmer was said to be "the cupbearer of the gods." He
was always able to get by somehow or other and have enough to eat.

But now there is all this commotion about making money. Ultra-fashionable produce such as grapes,
tomatoes, and melons are being grown. Flowers and fruit are being produced out-of-season in hothouses. Fish
breeding has been introduced and cattle are raised because profits are high.

This pattern shows clearly what happens when

farming climbs aboard the economic roller coaster. Fluctuations in prices are violent. There are profits, but there
are losses as well.
Failure is inevitable. Japanese agriculture has lost sight of its direction and has become unstable. It has

strayed away from the basic principles of agriculture and has become a business.

Research for Whose Benefit?

When I first began direct-seeding rice and winter grain, I was planning to harvest with a hand sickle and so I
thought it would be more convenient to set the seeds out in regular rows. After many attempts, dabbling about as
an amateur, I produced a handmade seeding tool. Thinking that this tool might be of practical use to other
farmers, I brought it to the man at the testing center. He told me that since we were in an age of large-sized
machinery he could not be bothered with my "contraption."

Next I went to a manufacturer of agricultural equipment. I was told here that such a simple machine, no
matter how much you tried to make of it, could not be sold for more than $3.50 apiece. "If we made a gadget
like that, the farmers might start thinking they didn't need the tractors we sell for thousands of dollars." He said
that nowadays the idea is to invent rice planting machines quickly, sell them head over heels for as long as
possible, then introduce something newer. Instead of small tractors, they wanted to change over to larger-sized
models, and my device was, to them, a step backward. To meet the demands of the times, resources are poured

into furthering useless research, and to this day my patent remains on the shelf.

It is the same with fertilizer and chemicals.

Instead of developing fertilizer with the farmer in mind, the emphasis is on developing something new, anything
at all, in order to make money. After the technicians leave their jobs at the testing centers, they move right over
to work for the large chemical companies.

Recently I was talking with Mr. Asada, a technical official in the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, and
he told me an interesting story. The vegetables grown in hothouses are extremely unsavory. Hearing that the
eggplants shipped out in winter have no vitamins and the cucumbers no flavor, he researched the matter and
found the reason: certain of the sun's rays could not penetrate the vinyl and glass enclosures in which the
vegetables were being grown. His investigation moved over to the lighting system inside the hothouses.

The fundamental question here is whether or not it is necessary for human beings to eat eggplants and
cucumbers during the winter: But, this point aside, the only reason they are grown during the winter is that they
can be sold then at a good price. Somebody develops a means to grow them, and after some time passes, it is
found that these vegetables have no nutritional value. Next, the technician thinks that if the nutrients are being
lost, a way must be found to prevent that loss. Because the trouble is thought to be with the lighting system, he
begins to research light rays. He thinks everything will be all right if he can produce a hothouse eggplant with
vitamins in it. I was told that there are some technicians who devote their entire lives to this kind of research.

Naturally, since such great efforts and resources have gone into producing this eggplant, and the vegetable is
said to be high in nutritional value, it is tagged at an even higher price and sells well. "If it is profitable, and if

you can sell it, there can't be anything wrong with it."

No matter how hard people try, they cannot improve upon naturally grown fruits and vegetables. Produce
grown in an unnatural way satisfies people's fleeting desires but weakens the human body and alters the body
chemistry so that it is dependent upon such foods. When this happens, vitamin supplements and medicines

become necessary. This situation only creates hardships for the farmer and suffering for the consumer.

What is Human-Food?

The other day someone from NHK television came by and asked me to say something about the flavor of
natural food. We talked, and then I asked him to compare the eggs laid by the hens in the coop down below with
those of the chickens running free up in the orchard. He found that the yolks of the eggs laid by the chickens
cooped up on the typical chicken ranch were soft and watery and their color was pale yellow. He observed that
the yolks of the eggs laid by the chickens living wild on the mountain were firm and resilient and bright orange
in color. When the old man who runs the sushi restaurant in town tasted one of these natural eggs, he said that
this was a "real egg," just like in the old days, and rejoiced as if it were some precious treasure.

Again, up in the tangerine orchard, there are many different vegetables growing among the weeds and
clover. Turnips, burdock, cucumbers and squash, peanuts, carrots, edible chrysanthemums, potatoes, onions, leaf
mustard, cabbage, several varieties of beans, and many other herbs and vegetables are all growing together. The
conversation turned to whether or not these vegetables, which had been grown in a semi-wild manner, had a
better flavor than those grown in the home garden or with the aid of chemical fertilizer in the fields. When we

compared

them, the taste was completely different, and we determined that the "wild" vegetables possessed a richer flavor.

I told the reporter that when vegetables are grown in a prepared field using chemical fertilizer, nitrogen,
phosphorus and potash are supplied. But when vegetables are grown with natural ground cover in soil naturally
rich in organic matter, they get a more balanced diet of nutrients. A great variety of weeds and grasses means
that a variety of essential nutrients and micronutrients are available to the vegetables. Plants which grow in such
balanced soil have a more subtle flavor.

Edible herbs and wild vegetables, plants growing on the mountain and in the meadow, are very high in
nutritional value and are also useful as medicine. Food and medicine are not two different things: they are the
front and back of one body. Chemically grown vegetables may be eaten for food, but they cannot be used as
medicine.

When you gather and eat the seven herbs of spring, [Watercress, shepherd's purse, wild turnip, cottonweed,
chickweed, wild radish, and bee nettle] your spirit becomes gentle. And when you eat bracken shoots, osmund
and shepherd's purse, you become calm. To calm restless, impatient feelings, shepherd's purse is the best of all.
They say that if children eat shepherd's purse, willow buds or insects living in trees, this will cure violent crying
tantrums, and in the old days children were often made to eat them. Daikon (Japanese radish) has for its ancestor
the plant called nazuna (shepherd's purse), and this word nazuna is related to the word nagomu, which means to

be softened. Daikon is the "herb that softens one's disposition."

Among wild foods insects are often overlooked.

During the war, when I worked at the research center, I was assigned to determine what insects in Southeast
Asia could be eaten. When I investigated this matter, I was amazed to discover that almost any insect is edible.
For example, no one would think that lice or fleas could be of any use at all, but lice, ground up and eaten
with winter grain, are a 'remedy for epilepsy, and fleas are a medicine for frostbite. All insect larvae are quite
edible, but they must be alive. Poring over the old texts, I found stories having to do with "delicacies" prepared

from maggots from the outhouse, and the flavor of the familiar silkworm was said to be exquisite

In a patch of mustard and wild turnips.

beyond compare. Even moths, if you shake the powder off their wings first, are very tasty.

So, whether from the standpoint of flavor or from the standpoint of health, many things which people
consider repulsive are actually quite tasty and also good for the human body.

Vegetables that are biologically closest to their wild ancestors are the best in flavor and the highest in food
value. For example, in the lily family (which includes nira, garlic, Chinese leek, green onion, pearl onion, and
bulb onion) the nira and Chinese leek are highest in nutrition, good as herbal medicine, and also useful as a
tonic for general well-being. To most people, however, the more domestic varieties, such as green onion and
bulb onion, are regarded as the best tasting. For some reason, modern people like the flavor of vegetables that
have departed from their wild state.

A similar taste preference applies to animal foods. Wild birds when eaten, are much better for the body than
domestic fowl such as chickens and ducks, and yet these birds, raised in an environment far removed from their
natural homes, are regarded as good tasting and sold at high prices. Goat's milk has a higher food value than
cow's milk, but it is the cow's milk which is in greater demand.

Foods that have departed far from their wild state and those raised chemically or in a completely contrived
environment unbalance the body chemistry. The more out of balance one's body becomes, the more one comes
to desire unnatural foods. This situation is dangerous to health.

To say that what one eats is merely a matter of preference is deceiving, because an unnatural or exotic die
creates a hardship for the farmer and the fisherman as well. It seems to me that the greater one's desires, the

more one has to work to satisfy

them. Some fish, such as the popular tuna and yellowtail must be caught in distant waters, but sardine, sea
bream, flounder, and other small fish can be caught in great abundance in the Inland Sea. Speaking nutritionally,
creatures which live in freshwater rivers and streams, such as carp, pond snails, stream crayfish, marsh crabs and
so on, are better for the body than those from salt water. Next come shallow-water ocean fish, and finally fish
from deep salt water and from distant seas. The foods that are nearby are best for human beings, and things that
he has to struggle to obtain turn out to be the least beneficial of all.

That is to say that if one accepts what is near at hand, all goes well. If the farmers who live in this village eat
only the foods that can be grown or gathered here, there will be no mistake. In the end, like the group of young
people living in the huts up in the orchard, one will find it simplest to eat brown rice and unpolished barley,
millet, and buckwheat, together with the seasonal plants and semi-wild vegetables. One ends up with the best
food; it has flavor, and is good for the body.

If 22 bushels (1,300 pounds) of rice and 22 bushels of winter grain are harvested from a quarter acre field
such as one of these, then the field will support five to ten people each investing an average of less than one
hour of labor per day. But if the field were turned over to pasturage, or if the grain were fed to cattle, only one
person could be supported per quarter acre. Meat becomes a luxury food when its production requires land
which could provide food directly for human consumption [although most meat in North America is produced
by feeding field crops such as wheat, barley, corn, and soybeans to animals, there are also large areas of land
best used when rotated regularly into pasture or hayfields. In Japan, almost no such land exists. Almost all meat

must be imported]. This has been shown clearly and definitely.

Each person should ponder seriously how much hardship he is causing by indulging in food so expensively
produced.

Meat and other imported foods are luxuries because they require more energy and resources than the
traditional vegetables and grains produced locally. It follows that people who limit themselves to a simple local
diet need do less work and use less land than those with an appetite for luxury.

If people continue to eat meat and imported food, within ten years it is certain that Japan will fall into a food
crisis. Within thirty years, there will be overwhelming shortages. The absurd idea has swept in from somewhere
that a change from rice-eating to bread-eating indicates an improvement in the everyday life of the Japanese
people. Actually this is not so. Brown rice and vegetables may seem to be coarse fare, but this is the very finest
diet nutritionally, and enables human beings to live simply and directly.

If we do have a food crisis it will not be caused by the insufficiency of nature's productive power, but by the

extravagance of human desire.

A Merciful Death for Barley

Forty years ago, as a result of increasing political hostility between the United States and Japan, importing
wheat from America became impossible. There was a general movement throughout the country to grow wheat
domestically. The American wheat varieties being used require a long growing season and the grain finally
matured in the middle of Japan's rainy season. Even after the farmer had taken such great pains to grow the crop,
it would often rot during the harvest. These varieties proved to be very unreliable and highly susceptible to
disease, so the farmers did not want to grow wheat. When ground and toasted in the traditional way, the taste
was so terrible that you almost choked and had to spit it out.

The traditional varieties of Japanese rye and barley can be harvested in May, before the rainy season, so
they are comparatively safe crops. Farmers had wheat cultivation forced upon them nonetheless. Everyone
laughed and said there was nothing worse than growing wheat, but they patiently went along with the
government policy.

After the war, American wheat was again imported in large quantities, causing the price of wheat grown in
Japan to fall. This added to the many other good reasons to discontinue wheat growing. "Give up wheat, give up

wheat!" was the slogan propagated

nationwide by the government's agricultural leaders, and the farmers gladly gave it up. At the same time,
because of the low price of imported wheat, the government encouraged the farmers to stop growing the
traditional winter crops of rye and barley. This policy was carried out and the fields of Japan were left to lie
fallow through the winter.

About ten years ago I was chosen to represent Ehime Prefecture in NHK television's "Outstanding Farmer of
the Year" competition. At that time I was asked by a member of the screening committee, "Mr. Fukuoka, why
don't you give up growing rye and barley?" I answered, "Rye and barley are easy crops to raise, and by growing
them in succession with rice we can produce the greatest number of calories from Japan's fields. That's why I
don't give them up."

It was made clear that no one who stubbornly goes against the will of the Ministry of Agriculture could be
named Outstanding Farmer and I then said, "If that's what keeps someone from getting the Outstanding Farmer
Award, then I'm better off without it." One of the members of the screening panel later said to me, "If I were to
leave the university and take up farming myself, I would probably farm as you do, and grow rice in summer, and
barley and rye over the winter every year as before the war."

Shortly after this episode, I appeared on an NHK television program in a panel discussion with various
university professors, and at that time I was again asked, "Why don't you give up growing rye and barley?" I
stated once again, very clearly, that I wasn't about to give them up for any one of a dozen good reasons. About
that time the slogan for giving up winter grain cultivation called for "A merciful death." That is, the practice of
growing winter grain and rice in succession should pass away quietly. But “merciful death” is too gentle a term;

the Ministry of

Agriculture really wanted it to die in the ditch. When it became clear to me that the main purpose of the program
was to promote a rapid end to growing winter grain, leaving it "dead by the side of the road" so to speak, I
exploded in indignation.

Forty years ago the call was to grow wheat, to grow foreign grain, to grow a useless and impossible crop.
Then it was said that the Japanese varieties of rye and barley did not have as high a food value as American
grain and the farmers regretfully gave up growing these traditional grains. As the standard of living rose by
leaps and bounds, the word went out to eat meat, eat eggs, drink milk, and change from eating rice to eating
bread. Corn, soybeans, and wheat were imported in ever-increasing quantities. American wheat was cheap, so
the growing of native rye and barley was abandoned. Japanese agriculture adopted measures which forced
farmers to take part-time jobs in town so they could buy the crops they had been told not to grow.

And now, new concern has arisen over the shortage of food resources. Self-sufficiency in rye and barley

production is again being advocated. They are saying there will even be subsidies. But it is not enough to grow
traditional winter grains for a couple of years and then to abandon them again. A sound agricultural policy must
be established. Because the Ministry of Agriculture has no clear idea of what should be grown in the first place,
and because it does not understand the connection between what is grown in the fields and the people's diet, a
consistent agricultural policy remains an impossibility.

If the Ministry's staff were to go to the mountains and meadows, gather the seven herbs of spring, and the
seven herbs of autumn [Chinese bell flower, arrowroot (kudzu), thoroughwort (a boneset), valerianacea, bush
clover, wild fringed pink, and Japanese pampas grass] and taste them, they would learn what the source of
human nourishment is. If they would investigate further they would see that you can live quite well on
traditional domestic crops such as rice, barley, rye, buckwheat, and vegetables, and they could decide simply
that this is all Japanese agriculture needs to grow. If that is all the farmers have to grow, farming becomes very
easy

Until now the line of thought among modern economists has been that small scale, self-sufficient farming is
wrong- that this is a primitive kind of agriculture- one that should be eliminated as quickly as possible. It is
being said that the area of each field must be expanded to handle the changeover to large-scale, American-style
agriculture. This way of thinking does not apply only to agriculture- developments in all areas are moving in this
direction.

The goal is to have only a few people in farming. The agricultural authorities say that fewer people, using
large, modern machinery can get greater yields from the same acreage. This is considered agricultural progress.
After the War, between 70% and 80% of the

people in Japan were farmers. This quickly changed to 50%, then 30%, 20%, and now the figure stands at
around 14%. It is the intention of the Ministry of Agriculture to achieve the same level as in Europe and
America, keeping less than 10% of the people as farmers and discouraging the rest.

In my opinion, if 100% of the people were farming it would be ideal. There is just a quarter-acre of arable
land for each person in Japan. If each single person were given one quarter-acre, that is 1% acres to a family of
five, that would be more than enough land to support the family for the whole year. If natural farming were
practiced, a farmer would also have plenty of time for leisure and social activities within the village community.

I think this is the most direct path toward making this country a happy, pleasant land.

Simply Serve Nature and All Is Well

Extravagance of desire is the fundamental cause which has led the world into its present predicament.

Fast rather than slow, more rather than less- this flashy “development” is linked directly to society's
impending collapse. It has only served to separate man from nature. Humanity must stop indulging the desire for
material possessions and personal gain and move instead toward spiritual awareness.

Agriculture must change from large mechanical operations to small farms attached only to life itself.
Material life and diet should be given a simple place. If this is done, work becomes pleasant, and spiritual
breathing space becomes plentiful.

The more the farmer increases the scale of his operation, the more his body and spirit are dissipated and the
further he falls away from a spiritually satisfying life. A life of small-scale farming may appear to be primitive,
but in living such a life, it becomes possible to contemplate the Great Way [the path of spiritual awareness
which involves attentiveness to and care for the ordinary activities of daily life]. I believe that if one fathoms
deeply one's own neighborhood and the everyday world in which he lives, the greatest of worlds will be
revealed.

At the end of the year the one-acre farmer of long ago spent January, February, and March hunting rabbits

in the hills. Though he was called a poor peasant, he still had this kind of freedom. The New Year's holiday
lasted about three months. Gradually this vacation came to be shortened to two months, one month, and now
New Year's has come to be a three-day holiday.

The dwindling of the New Year's holiday indicates how busy the farmer has become and how he has lost his
easy-going physical and spiritual well- being. There is no time in modern agriculture for a farmer to write a
poem or compose a song.

The other day I was surprised to notice, while I was cleaning the little village shrine, that there were some
plaques hanging on the wall. Brushing off the dust and looking at the dim and faded letters, I could make out
dozens of haiku poems. Even in a little village such as this, twenty or thirty people had composed haiku and
presented them as offerings. That is how much open space people had in their lives in the old days. Some of the
verses must have been several centuries old. Since it was that long ago they were probably poor farmers, but
they still had leisure to write haiku.

Now there is no one in this village with enough time to write poetry. During the cold winter months, only a
few villagers can find the time to sneak out for a day or two to go after rabbits. For leisure, now, the television is
the center of attention, and there is no time at all for the simple pastimes which brought richness to the farmer's
daily life. This is what I mean when I say that agriculture has become poor and weak spiritually; it is concerning
itself only with material development.

Lao Tzu, the Taoist sage, says that a whole and decent life can be lived in a small village. Bodhidharma, the

founder of Zen, spent nine years living in a cave without bustling about. To be worried about

making money, expanding, developing, growing cash crops and shipping them out is not the way of the farmer.
To be here, caring for a small field, in full possession of the freedom and plentitude of each day, every day-this
must have been the original way of agriculture.

To break experience in half and call one side physical and the other spiritual is narrowing and confusing.
People do not live dependent on food. Ultimately, we cannot know what food is. It would be better if people
stopped even thinking about food. Similarly, it would be well if people stopped troubling themselves about
discovering the "true meaning of life;" we can never know the answers to great spiritual questions, but it’s all
right not to understand. We have been born and are living on the earth to face directly the reality of living.

Living is no more than the result of being born. Whatever it is people eat to live, whatever people think they

must eat to live, is nothing more

“There is no time in modern agriculture for a farmer to write a poem or compose a song.”

than something they have thought up. The world exists in such a way that if people will set aside their human
will than something they have thought up. The and be guided instead by nature there is no reason to expect to starve.

Just to live here and now- this is the true basis of human life. When a naive scientific knowledge becomes
the basis of living, people come to live as if they are dependent only on starch, fats, and protein, and plants on
nitrogen, phosphorous, and potash.

And the scientists, no matter how much they investigate nature, no matter how far they research, they only
come to realize in the end how perfect and mysterious nature really is. To believe that by research and invention
humanity can create something better than nature is an illusion. | think that people are struggling for no other
reason than to come to know what you might call the vast incomprehensibility of nature.

So for the farmer in his work: serve nature and all is well. Farming used to be sacred work. When humanity
fell away from this ideal, modern commercial agriculture rose. When the farmer began to grow crops to make
money, he forgot the real principles of agriculture.

Of course the merchant has a role to play in society, but glorification of merchant activities tends to draw
people away from a recognition of the true source of life. Farming, as an occupation which is within nature, lies
close to this source. Many farmers, are unaware of nature even while living and working in natural
surroundings, but it seems to me that farming offers many opportunities for greater awareness.

"Whether autumn will bring wind or rain, I cannot know, but today I will be working in the fields." Those
are the words of an old country song. They express the truth of farming as a way of life. No matter how the

harvest will turn out, whether or not

there will be enough food to eat, in simply sowing seed and caring tenderly for plants under nature's guidance

there is joy.

Various Schools of Natural Farming

I do not particularly like the word "work." Human beings are the only animals who have to work, and I think
this is the most ridiculous thing in the world. Other animals make their livings by living, but people work like
crazy, thinking that they have to in order to stay alive. The bigger the job, the greater the challenge, the more
wonderful they think it is. It would be good to give up that way of thinking and live an easy, comfortable life
with plenty of free time. I think that the way animals live in the tropics, stepping outside in the morning and
evening to see if there is something to eat, and taking a long nap in the afternoon, must be a wonderful life.

For human beings, a life of such simplicity would be possible if one worked to produce directly his daily
necessities. In such a life, work is not work as people generally think of it, but simply doing what needs to be
done.

To move things in this direction is my goal. It is also the goal of the seven or eight young people who live
communally in the huts on the mountain and help out with the farming chores. These young people want to
become farmers, to establish new villages and communities, and to give this sort of life a try. They come to my

farm to learn the practical skills of farming that they will need to carry out this plan.

If you look across the country you might notice that quite a few communes have been springing up recently.
If they are called gatherings of hippies, well, they could be viewed that way too, I suppose. But in living and
working together, finding the way back to nature, they are the model of the "new farmer." They understand that
to become firmly rooted means to live from the yields of their own land. A community that cannot manage to
produce its own food will not last long.

Many of these young people travel to India, or to France's Gandhi Village, spend time on a kibbutz in Israel,
or visit communes in the mountains and deserts of the American West. There are those like the group on
Suwanose Island in the Tokara Island chain of Southern Japan, who try new forms of family living and
experience the closeness of tribal ways. I think that the movement of this handful of people is leading the way to
a better time. It is among these people that natural farming is now rapidly taking hold and gaining momentum.

In addition, various religious groups have come to take up natural farming. In seeking the essential nature of
man, no matter how you go about it, you must begin with the consideration of health. The path which leads to
right awareness involves living each day straightforwardly and growing and eating wholesome, natural food. It
follows that natural farming has been for many people the best place to begin.

I do not belong to any religious group myself and will freely discuss my views with anyone at all. I do not
care much for snaking distinctions among Christianity, Buddhism, Shinto, and the other religions, but it does
intrigue me that people of deep religious conviction are attracted to my farm. I think this is because natural

farming, unlike other types of farming, is based on a philosophy which penetrates beyond

considerations of soil analysis, pH, and harvest yields. Some time ago, a fellow from the Paris Organic
Gardening Center climbed up the mountain, and we spent the day talking. Hearing about affairs in France, I
learned that they were planning an organic farming conference on an international scale, and as preparation for
the meeting, this Frenchman was visiting organic and natural farms all over the world. I showed him around the
orchard and then we sat down over a cup of mugwort tea and discussed some of my observations over the past
thirty-odd years.

First I said that when you look over the principles of the organic farming popular in the West, you will find
that they hardly differ from those of the traditional Oriental agriculture practiced in China, Korea, and Japan for
many centuries. All Japanese farmers were still using this type of farming through the Meiji and Taisho Eras
[1868-1926] and right up until the end of the Second World War.

It was a system which emphasized the fundamental importance of compost and of recycling human and
animal waste. The form of management was intensive and included such practices as crop rotation, companion
planting, and the use of green manure. Since space was limited, fields were never left untended and the planting
and harvesting schedules proceeded with precision. All organic residue was made into compost and returned to
the fields. The use of compost was officially encouraged and agricultural research was mainly concerned with
organic matter and composting techniques.

So an agriculture joining animals, crops, and human beings into one body existed as the mainstream of

Japanese farming up to modern times. It could be said that organic farming as practiced in the

West takes as its point of departure this traditional agriculture of the Orient.

I went on to say that among natural farming methods two kinds could be distinguished: broad, transcendent
natural farming, and the narrow natural farming of the relative world [this is the world as understood by the
intellect]. If | were pressed to talk about it in Buddhist terms, the two could be called respectively as Mahayana
and Hinayana natural farming.

Broad, Mahayana natural farming arises of itself when a unity exists between man and nature. It conforms to
nature as it is, and to the mind as it is. It proceeds from the conviction that if the individual temporarily
abandons human will and so allows himself to be guided by nature, nature responds by providing everything. To
give a simple analogy, in transcendent natural farming the relationship between humanity and nature can be
compared with a husband and wife joined in perfect marriage. The marriage is not bestowed, not received; the
perfect pair comes into existence of itself.

Narrow natural farming, on the other hand, is pursuing the way of nature; it self-consciously attempts, by
"organic" or other methods, to follow nature. Farming is used for achieving a given objective. Although
sincerely loving nature and earnestly proposing to her, the relationship is still tentative. Modern industrial
farming desires heaven's wisdom, without grasping its meaning, and at the same time wants to make use of
nature. Restlessly searching, it is unable to find anyone to propose to.

The narrow view of natural farming says that it is good for the farmer to apply organic material to the soil

and good to raise animals, and that this is the best and most efficient way to put nature to use. To speak

in terms of personal practice, this is fine, but with this way alone, the spirit of true natural farming cannot be
kept alive. This kind of narrow natural farming is analogous to the school of swordsmanship known as the
one-stroke school, which seeks victory through the skillful, yet self-conscious application of technique. Modern
industrial farming follows the two-stroke school, which believes that victory can be won by delivering the
greatest barrage of swordstrokes.

Pure natural farming, by contrast, is the no-stroke school. It goes nowhere and seeks no victory. Putting
"doing nothing" into practice is the one thing the farmer should strive to accomplish. Lao Tzu spoke of
non-active nature, and I think that if he were a farmer he would certainly practice natural farming. I believe that
Gandhi's way, a methodless method, acting with a non-winning, non-opposing state of mind, is akin to natural
farming. When it is understood that one loses joy and happiness in the attempt to possess them, the essence of
natural farming will be realized. The ultimate goal of farming is not the growing of crops, but the cultivation and
perfection of human beings. [In this paragraph Mr. Fukuoka is drawing a distinction between techniques
undertaken in conscious pursuit of a given objective, and those which arise spontaneously as the expression of a
person's harmony with nature as he goes about his daily business, free from the domination of the volitional

intellect].




Confusion about Food

A young fellow who had stayed three years in one of the huts on the mountain said one day, "You know,
when people say ‘natural food' I don't know what they mean any more."

When you think about it, everybody is familiar with the words "natural food," but it is not clearly
understood what natural food actually is. There are many who feel that eating food which contains no artificial
chemicals or additives is a natural diet, and there are others who think vaguely that a natural diet is eating foods
just as they are found in nature.

If you ask whether the use of fire and salt in cooking is natural or unnatural, one could answer either way. If
the diet of the people of primitive times, eating only plants and animals living in their wild state, is "natural,"
then a diet which uses salt and fire cannot be called natural. But if it is argued that the knowledge acquired in
ancient times of using fire and salt was humanity's natural destiny, then food prepared accordingly is perfectly
natural. Is food to which human techniques of preparation have been applied good, or should wild foods just as
they are in nature be considered good? Can cultivated crops be said to be natural? Where do you draw the line
between natural and unnatural?

It could be said that the term "natural diet" in

Japan originated with the teachings of Sagen Ishizuka in the Meiji Era. His theory was later refined and
elaborated by Mr. Sakurazawa[George Osawa] and Mr. Niki. The Path of Nutrition, known in the West as
Macrobiotics, is based on the theory of non-duality and the yin-yang concepts of the I Ching. Since this usually
means a brown rice diet, "natural diet" is generally thought of as eating whole grains and vegetables. Natural
food, however, cannot be summed up so simply as brown rice vegetarianism.

So what is it?

The reason for all the confusion is that there are two paths of human knowledge- discriminating and non-
discriminating.[This is a distinction made by many Oriental philosophers. Discriminating knowledge is derived
from the analytic, willful intellect in an attempt to organize experience into a logical framework. Mr. Fukuoka
believes that in this process, the individual sets himself apart from nature. It is the "limited scientific truth and
judgment".

Non-discriminating knowledge arises without conscious effort on the part of the individual when experience
is accepted as it is, without interpretation by the intellect.

While discriminating knowledge is essential for analyzing practical problems in the world, Mr. Fukuoka
believes that ultimately it provides too narrow a perspective.] People generally believe that unmistaken
recognition of the world is possible through discrimination alone. Therefore, the word "nature" as it is generally
spoken, denotes nature as it is perceived by the discriminating intellect.

I deny the empty image of nature as created by the human intellect, and clearly distinguish it from nature
itself as experienced by non-discriminating understanding. If we eradicate the false conception of nature, I

believe the root of the world's disorder will disappear.

In the West natural science developed from discriminating knowledge; in the East the philosophy of
yin-yang and of the I Ching developed from the same source. But scientific truth can never reach absolute truth,
and philosophies, after all, are nothing more than interpretations of the world. Nature as grasped by scientific
knowledge is a nature which has been destroyed; it is a ghost possessing a skeleton, but no soul. Nature as
grasped by philosophical knowledge is a theory created out of human speculation, a ghost with a soul, but no
structure.

There is no way in which non-discriminating knowledge can be realized except by direct intuition, but
people try to fit it into a familiar framework by calling it "instinct". It is actually knowledge from an unnamable
source. Abandon the discriminating mind and transcend the world of relativity if you want to know the true

appearance of nature. From the beginning there is no east or west, no four seasons, and no yin or yang.

A mid-day meal of soup and rice with pickled vegetables.

When I had gone this far, the youth asked, "Then you not only deny natural science, but also the Oriental
philosophies based on yin-yang and the I Ching?"

As temporary expedients or as directional markers they could be acknowledged as valuable, I said, but they
should not be considered as the highest achievements. Scientific truths and philosophies are concepts of the
relative world, and there they hold true and their value is recognized. For example, for modern people living in
the relative world, disrupting the order of nature and bringing about the collapse of their own body and spirit,
the yin-yang system can serve as a fitting and effective pointer toward the restoration of order.

Such paths could be said to be useful theories to help people achieve a condensed and compact diet until a
true natural diet is attained. But if you realize that the eventual human goal is to transcend the world of
relativity, to play in a realm of freedom, then plodding along attached to theory is unfortunate. When the
individual is able to enter a world in which the two aspects of yin and yang return to their original unity, the
mission of these symbols comes to an end.

A youth who had recently arrived spoke up: "Then if you become a natural person you can eat anything you
want?"

If you expect a bright world on the other side of the tunnel, the darkness of the tunnel lasts all the longer.
When you no longer want to eat something tasty, you can taste the real flavor of whatever you are eating. It is
easy to lay out the simple foods of a natural diet on the dining table, but those who can truly enjoy such a feast

are few.

Nature's Food Mandala

My thinking on natural food is the same as it is on natural farming. Just as natural farming complies with
nature as it is, that is, nature as apprehended by the non-discriminating mind, so natural diet is a way of eating in
which foods gathered in the wild or crops grown through natural farming, and fish caught by natural methods,
are acquired without intentional action through the non-discriminating mind.

Even though I speak of non-intentional action and non-method, wisdom acquired over time in the course of
daily life is, of course, acknowledged. The use of salt and fire in cooking could be criticized as the first step in
the separation of man from nature, but it is simply natural wisdom as apprehended by primitive people, and
should be sanctioned as wisdom bestowed by heaven.

Crops which have evolved over thousands and tens of thousands of years by dwelling together with human
beings are not products born entirely from the discriminating knowledge of the farmer, and can be thought of as
naturally occurring foods. But the instantly altered varieties which have not evolved under natural
circumstances, but rather have been developed by an agricultural science which has drawn far away from nature,

as well as mass-produced fish, shellfish, and domestic animals, fall outside that category.

Farming, fishing, animal raising, the everyday realities of food, clothing, shelter, spiritual life, everything
there is-must form a union with nature.

I have drawn the following diagrams to help explain the natural diet which transcends science and
philosophy The first brings together the foods which people can most easily obtain, and these are arranged more
or less in groups. The second shows the foods as they are available during the various months of the year. These
diagrams compose nature's food mandala [a circular diagram in eastern art and religion, symbolizing the totality
and wholeness of its subject]. From this mandala it can be seen that the sources of food provided on the face of
the earth are nearly limitless. If people will acquire food through “no-mind”,[a Buddhist term which describes
the state in which there is no distinction between the individual and the "external" world] even though they
know nothing at all about yin and yang, they can attain a perfect natural diet.

The fishermen and farmers in a Japanese village have no particular interest in the logic of these diagrams.
They follow nature's prescription by selecting seasonal foods from their immediate area.

From early spring, when the seven herbs sprout forth from the earth, the farmer can taste seven flavors. To
go along with these are the delicious flavors of pond snails, sea clams, and turban shellfish.

The season of green arrives in March. Horsetail, bracken, mugwort, osmund, and other mountain plants, and
of course the young leaves of the persimmon and peach trees and the sprouts of mountain yams can all be eaten.
Possessing a light, delicate flavor, they make delicious tempura and can also be used as seasonings. At the

seashore, sea vegetables such as kelp, nori, and rockweed are delicious and abundant during the spring months.


When the bamboo sends up its young shoots, grey rock cod, sea bream, and striped pig fish are at their most
delicious. The iris blossom season is celebrated with the slender ribbon fish and mackerel sashimi. Green peas,
snow peas, lima beans, and fava beans are delicious eaten right from the pod or boiled with whole grains such as
brown rice, wheat, or barley.

Toward the end of the rainy season, [in most of Japan the rainy season lasts from June to mid-July] Japanese
plums are salted away, and strawberries and raspberries can be gathered in abundance. At this time it is natural
that the body begins to desire the crisp flavor of scallions together with watery fruits such as loquats, apricots,
and. peaches. The loquat's fruit is not the only part of the plant which can be eaten. The seed can be ground into
"coffee," and when the leaves are brewed to make tea it is among the finest of medicines. The mature leaves of
peach and persimmon trees produce a tonic for longevity.

Beneath the bright midsummer sun, eating melons and licking honey in the shade of a big tree is a favorite
pastime. The many summer vegetables such as carrot, spinach, radish, and cucumber become ripe and ready for
harvesting. The body also needs vegetable or sesame oil to hold off summer sloth.

If you call it mysterious, then mysterious it is that the winter grain harvested in spring goes well with the
decreased summertime appetite, and so in summer barley noodles of various sizes and shapes are prepared often.
Buckwheat grain is harvested in summer. It is an ancient wild plant and a food which goes well with this season.

Early fall is a happy season, with soybeans and small red azuki beans, many fruits, vegetables, and various

yellow grains all ripening at the same time.


Millet cakes are enjoyed at the autumn moon viewing celebrations. Parboiled soybeans are served along with
taro potatoes. As autumn deepens, maize, and rice steamed with red beans, matsutake mushrooms, or chestnuts
are eaten and enjoyed often. Most important, the rice which has absorbed the sun's rays all summer long ripens
in the fall. This means that a staple food which can be plentifully obtained and is rich in calories is provided for
the cold winter months.

At first frost one feels like looking in on the fish-broiler's stand. Deep-water blue fish such as yellowtail and
tuna can be caught during this season. It is interesting that the Japanese radish and the leafy vegetables abundant
during this season go well with these fish.

The New Year's holiday cooking is prepared largely from food which has been pickled and salted away
especially for the great celebration. Salted salmon, herring eggs, red sea bream, lobster, kelp, and black beans
have been served every year at this feast for many centuries.

Digging the radishes and turnips which have been left in the ground, covered with a blanket of soil and
snow, is an enjoyable experience during the winter season. Grains and various beans grown during the year and
miso and soy sauce are staples always on hand. Along with the cabbages, radishes, squash, and sweet potatoes
stored in the autumn, a variety of foods are available during the months of bitter cold. Leeks and wild scallions
go well with the delicate flavor of oysters and sea cucumbers which can be gathered then.

Waiting for spring to arrive, one catches sight of colt's foot shoots and the edible leaves of the creeping

strawberry geranium peeping out of the snow. With the return of watercress, shepherd's purse, chickweed,

and the other wild herbs, a garden of natural spring vegetables can be harvested beneath the kitchen window.

Thus, by following a humble diet, gathering the foods of the various seasons from close at hand, and

savoring their wholesome and nourishing flavor, the local villagers accept what nature provides.

The villagers know the delicious flavor of the food, but they cannot taste the mysterious flavor of nature.

No, it is rather that they taste it, but cannot express it with words.

A natural diet lies right at one's feet.

The Culture of Food

When asked why we eat food, few think further than the fact that food is necessary to support the life and
growth of the human body. Beyond this, however, there is the deeper question of the relationship of food to the
human spirit. For animals it is enough to eat, play, and sleep. For humans, too, it would be a great
accomplishment if they could enjoy nourishing food, a simple daily round, and restful sleep.

Buddha said, "Form is emptiness and emptiness is form." Since the "form" of Buddhist terminology
indicates matter, or things, and emptiness is the mind, he is saying that matter and mind are the same. Things
have many different colors, shapes, and flavors, and people's minds flit from side to side, attracted to the various

qualities of things. But actually, matter and mind are one.

Color
In the world there are seven basic colors. But if these seven colors are combined, they become white. When
split by a prism the white light becomes seven colors. When man views the world with "no-mind" the color in
the color vanishes. It is no-color. Only when they are viewed by the seven-colored mind of discrimination do the

seven colors appear.

Water undergoes countless changes but water is still water. In the same way, although the conscious mind
appears to undergo changes, the original unmoving mind does not change. When one becomes infatuated with
the seven colors, the mind is easily distracted. The colors of leaves, branches, and fruit are perceived, while the
basis of color passes unnoticed.

This is also true of food. In this world there are many natural substances that are suitable for human food.
These foods are distinguished by the mind and are thought to have good and bad qualities. People then
consciously select what they think they must have. This process of selection impedes the recognition of the basis
of human nourishment, which is what heaven prescribes for the place and season.

Nature's colors, like hydrangea blossoms, change easily. The body of nature is perpetual transformation. For
the same reason that it is called infinite motion, it may also be considered non-moving motion. When reason is
applied to selecting foods, one's understanding of nature becomes fixed and nature's transformations, such as the
seasonal changes, are ignored.

The purpose of a natural diet is not to create knowledgeable people who can give sound explanations and
skillfully select among the various foods, but to create unknowing people who take food without consciously
making distinctions. This does not go against the way of nature. By realizing "no-mind," without becoming lost

in the subtleties of form, accepting the color of the colorless as color, right diet begins.

Flavor

People say, "You don't know what food tastes like until you try it." But even when you do try it, the

food's flavor may vary, depending on time and circumstance and the dispositon of the person who is tasting.

If you ask a scientist what the substance of flavor is, he will try to define it by isolating the various
components and by determining the proportions of sweet, sour, bitter, salty, and pungent. But flavor cannot be
defined by analysis or even by the tip of the tongue. Even though the five flavors are perceived by the tongue,
the impressions are collected and interpreted by the mind.

A natural person can achieve, right diet because his instinct is in proper working order. He is satisfied with
simple food; it is nutritious, tastes good, and is useful daily medicine. Food and the human spirit are united.

Modern people have lost their clear instinct and consequently have become unable to gather and enjoy the
seven herbs of spring. They go out seeking a variety of flavors. Their diet becomes disordered, the gap between
likes and dislikes widens, and their instinct becomes more and more bewildered. At this point people begin to
apply strong seasonings to their food and to use elaborate cooking techniques, further deepening the confusion.
Food and the human spirit have become estranged.

Most people today have even become separated from the flavor of rice. The whole grain is refined and
processed, leaving only the tasteless starch. Polished rice lacks the unique fragrance and flavor of whole rice.
Consequently, it requires seasonings and must be supplemented with side dishes or covered with sauce. People
think, mistakenly, that it does not matter that the food value of the rice is low, as long as vitamin supplements or
other foods such as meat or fish supply the missing nutrients.

Flavorful foods are not flavorful in themselves.

Food is not delicious unless a person thinks it is. Although most people think that beef and chicken are
delectable, to a person who for physical or spiritual reasons has decided that he dislikes them, they are repulsive.

Just playing or doing nothing at all, children are happy. A discriminating adult, on the other hand, decides
what will make him happy, and when these conditions are met he feels satisfied. Foods taste good to him not
necessarily because they have nature's subtle flavors and are nourishing to the body, but because his taste has
been conditioned to the idea that they taste good.

Wheat noodles are delicious, but a cup of instant noodles from a vending machine tastes extremely bad. But,
by advertising, remove the idea that they taste bad, and to many people even these unsavory noodles somehow
come to taste good.

There are stories that, deceived by a fox, people have eaten horse manure. It is nothing to laugh about.
People nowadays eat with their minds, not with their bodies. Many people do not care if there is monosodium
glutamate in their food, but they taste only with the tip of the tongue, so they are easily fooled.

At first people ate simply because they were alive and because food was tasty. Modern people have come to
think that if they do not prepare food with elaborate seasonings, the meal will be tasteless. If you do not try to
make food delicious, you will find that nature has made it so.

The first consideration should be to live in such a way that the food itself tastes good, but today all the effort
goes instead into adding tastiness to food. Ironically, delicious foods have all but vanished.

People tried to make delicious bread, and delicious bread disappeared. In trying to make rich luxurious

foods they made useless foods, and now people's appetites are unsatisfied.

The best methods of food preparation preserve nature's delicate flavors. The daily wisdom of long ago
enabled people to make the various kinds of vegetable pickles, such as sun-dried pickles, salt-pickles,
bran-pickles, and miso-pickles, so that the flavor of the vegetable itself was also preserved.

The art of cooking begins with sea salt and a crackling fire. When food is prepared by someone sensitive to
the fundamentals of cookery, it maintains its natural flavor. If, by being cooked, food takes on some strange and
exotic flavor, and if the purpose of this change is merely to delight the palate, this is false cooking.

Culture is usually thought of as something created, maintained, and developed by humanity's efforts alone.
But culture always originates in the partnership of man and nature. When the union of human society and nature
is realized, culture takes shape of itself. Culture has always been closely connected with daily life, and so has
been passed on to future generations, and has been preserved up to the present time.

Something born from human pride and the quest for pleasure cannot be considered true culture. True culture
is born within nature, and is simple, humble, and pure. Lacking true culture, humanity will perish.

When people rejected natural food and took up refined food instead, society set out on a path toward its own

destruction. This is because such food is not the product of true culture. Food is life, and life must not step away

from nature.

Living by Bread Alone

There is nothing better than eating delicious food, but for most people eating is just a way to nourish the
body, to have energy to work and to live to an old age. Mothers often tell their children to eat their food- even if
they do not like the taste- because it is "good " for them.

But nutrition cannot be separated from the sense of taste. Nutritious foods, good for the human body, whet
the appetite and are delicious on their own account. Proper nourishment is inseparable from good flavor.

Not too long ago the daily meal of the farmers in this area consisted of rice and barley with miso and pickled

vegetables. This diet gave long life, a strong constitution, and good health. Stewed vegetables and steamed rice
with red beans was a once-a-month feast. The farmer's healthy, robust body was able to nourish itself well on
this simple rice diet.

The traditional brown rice-and-vegetable diet of the East is very different from that of most Western
societies. Western nutritional science believes that unless certain amounts of starch, fat, protein, minerals, and
vitamins are eaten each day, a well-balanced diet and good health cannot be preserved. This belief produced the

mother who stuffs "nutritious" food into her youngster's mouth.

One might suppose that Western dietetics, with its elaborate theories and calculations, could leave no doubts
about proper diet. The fact is, it creates far more problems than it resolves.

One problem is that in Western nutritional science there is no effort to adjust the diet to the natural cycle.
The diet that results serves to isolate human beings from nature. A fear of nature and a general sense of
insecurity are often the unfortunate results.

Another problem is that spiritual and emotional values are entirely forgotten, even though foods are directly
connected with human spirit and emotions. If the human being is viewed merely as a physiological object, it is

impossible to produce a coherent understanding of diet. When bits and pieces of information

are collected and brought together in confusion, the result is an imperfect diet which draws away from nature.

"Within one thing lie all things, but if all things are brought together not one thing can arise." Western
science is unable to grasp this precept of eastern philosophy. A person can analyze and investigate a butterfly as
far as he likes, but he cannot make a butterfly.

If the Western scientific diet were put into practice on a wide scale, what sort of practical problems do you
suppose would occur? High quality beef, eggs, milk, vegetables, bread, and other foods would have to be readily
available all year around. Large scale production and long-term storage would become necessary. Already in
Japan, adoption of this diet has caused farmers to produce summer vegetables such as lettuce, cucumbers,
eggplants, and tomatoes in the winter. It will not be long before farmers are asked to harvest persimmons in
spring and peaches in the autumn.

It is unreasonable to expect that a wholesome, balanced diet can be achieved simply by supplying a great
variety of foods regardless of the season. Compared with plants which ripen naturally, vegetables and fruits
grown out-of-season under necessarily unnatural conditions contain few vitamins and minerals. It is not
surprising that summer vegetables grown in the autumn or winter have none of the flavor and fragrance of those
grown beneath the sun by organic and natural methods.

Chemical analysis, nutritional ratios, and other such considerations are the main causes of error. The food
prescribed by modern science is far from the traditional Oriental diet, and it is undermining the health of the

Japanese people.

Summing Up Diet

In this world there exist four main classifications of diet:

(1) A lax diet conforming to habitual desires and taste preferences. People following this diet sway back and
forth erratically in response to whims and fancies. This diet could be called self-indulgent, empty eating.

(2) The standard nutritional diet of most people, proceeding from biological conclusions. Nutritious foods
are eaten for the purpose of maintaining the life of the body. It could be called materialist, scientific eating.

(3) The diet based on spiritual principles and idealistic philosophy. Limiting foods, aiming toward
compression, most "natural" diets fall into this category. This could be called the diet of principle.

(4) The natural diet, following the will of heaven. Discarding all human knowledge, this diet could be called
the diet of non-discrimination.

People first draw away from the empty diet which is the source of countless diseases. Next, becoming
disenchanted with the scientific diet, which merely attempts to maintain biological life, many proceed to a diet

of principle. Finally, transcending

this, one arrives at the non-discriminating diet of the natural person.

The Diet of Non-Discrimination

Human life is not sustained by its own power. Nature gives birth to human beings and keeps them alive.
This is the relation in which people stand to nature. Food is a gift of heaven. People do not create foods from
nature; heaven bestows them.

Food is food and food is not food. It is a part of man and is apart from man.

When food, the body, the heart, and the mind become perfectly united within nature, a natural diet becomes
possible. The body as it is, following its own instinct, eating if something tastes good, abstaining if it does not,
is free.

It is impossible to prescribe rules and proportions for a natural diet [a definite code or system by which one
can consciously decide these questions is impossible. Nature, or the body itself, serves as a capable guide. But
this subtle guidance goes unheard by most people because of the clamor caused by desire and by the activity of
the discriminating mind]. This diet defines itself according to the local environment, and the various needs and

the bodily constitution of each person.
The Diet of Principle

Everyone should be aware that nature is always complete, balanced in perfect harmony within itself. Natural
food is whole and within the whole are nourishment and subtle flavors.
It appears that, by applying the system of yin and yang, people can explain the origin of the universe and the

transformations of nature. It may also seem that the harmony of the human body can be determined

and consciously sustained. But if the doctrines are entered into too deeply (as is necessary in the study of
Eastern medicine) one enters the domain of science and fails to make the essential escape from discriminating
perception.

Swept along by the subtleties of human knowledge without recognizing its limits, the practitioner of the diet
of principle comes to concern himself only with separate objects. But when trying to grasp the meaning of

nature with a wide and far-reaching vision, he fails to notice the small things happening at his feet.
The Typical Sick Person's Diet

Sickness comes when people draw apart from nature. The severity of the disease is directly proportional to
the degree of separation. If a sick person returns to a healthy environment often the disease will disappear.
When alienation from nature becomes extreme, the number of sick people increases. Then the desire to return to
nature becomes stronger. But in seeking to return to nature, there is no clear understanding of what nature is,
and so the attempt proves futile.

Even if one lives a primitive life back in the mountains, he may still fail to grasp the true objective. If yon
try to do something, your efforts will never achieve the desired result.

People living in the cities face tremendous difficulty in trying to attain a natural diet. Natural food is simply
not available, because farmers have stopped growing it. Even if they could buy natural food, people's bodies

would need to be fit to digest such hearty fare.

In this sort of situation, if you try to eat wholesome meals or attain a balanced yin-yang diet, you

need practically supernatural means and powers of judgment. Far from a return to nature, a complicated, strange
sort of "natural" diet arises and the individual is only drawn further away from nature.

If you look inside "health food" stores these days you will find a bewildering assortment of fresh foods,
packaged foods, vitamins, and dietary supplements. In the literature many different types of diets are presented
as being "natural," nutritious, and the best for health. If someone says it is healthful to boil foods together, there
is someone else who says foods boiled together are only good for making people sick. Some emphasize the
essential value of salt in the diet, others say that too much salt causes disease. If there is someone who shuns
fruit as yin and food for monkeys, there is someone else who says fruit and vegetables are the very best foods
for providing longevity and a happy disposition.

At various times and in various circumstances all of these opinions could be said to be correct, and so
people come to be confused. Or rather, to a confused person, all of these theories become material for creating
greater confusion.

Nature is in constant transition, changing from moment to moment. People cannot grasp nature's true
appearance. The face of nature is unknowable. Trying to capture the unknowable in theories and formalized
doctrines is like trying to catch the wind in a butterfly net.

If you hit the mark on the wrong target, you have missed.

Humanity is like a blind man who does not know where he is heading. He gropes around with the cane of
scientific knowledge, depending on yin and yang to set his course.

What I want to say is, don't eat food with your head, and that is to say get rid of the discriminating

mind. I hoped that the food mandala I drew earlier would serve as a guide to show at a glance the relationship of
various foods to each other and to human beings. But you can throw that away too after you have seen it once.

The prime consideration is for a person to develop the sensitivity to allow the body to choose food by itself.
Thinking only about the foods themselves and leaving the spirit aside, is like making visits to the temple,
reading the sutras, and leaving Buddha on the outside. Rather than studying philosophical theory to reach an
understanding of food, it is better to arrive at a theory from within one's daily diet.

Doctors take care of sick people; healthy people are cared for by nature. Instead of getting sick and then
becoming absorbed in a natural diet to get well, one should live in a natural environment so that sickness does
not appear.

The young people who come to stay in the huts on the mountain and live a primitive life, eating natural
foods and practicing natural farming, are aware of man's ultimate purpose, and they have set out to live in

accordance with it in the most direct way.

Food and Farming

This book on natural farming necessarily includes a consideration of natural food. This is because food and
farming are the front and back of one body. It is clearer than firelight that if natural farming is not practiced
natural food will not be available to the public. But if natural diet is not established the farmer will remain
confused about what to grow.

Unless people become natural people, there can be neither natural farming nor natural food. In one of the
huts on the mountain I left the words, "Right Food, Right Action, Right Awareness” [this motto is phrased after
the Buddhist Eightfold Path of spiritual realization] inscribed on a pinewood plaque above the fireplace. The
three cannot be separated from one another. If one is missing, none can be realized. If one is realized, all are
realized.

People complacently view the world as a place where "progress" grows out of turmoil and confusion. But
purposeless and destructive development invites confusion of thought, invites nothing less than the degeneration
and collapse of humankind. If it is not clearly understood what the non-moving source of all this activity is-

what nature is- it will be impossible to recover our health.




Foolishness Comes Out Looking Smart

The autumn nights are long and chilly. The time would be well spent gazing into glowing coals, hands
pressed around a warm cup of tea. It is said that anything is fine to talk about while sitting around the fire, and
so, thinking that the grudges of my fellow farmers would be an interesting topic, I have casually brought up the
subject. But it seems there are going to be some problems.

Here I have been, talking all the time about how everything is of no account, saying that humanity is
ignorant, that there is nothing to strive for, and that whatever is done is wasted effort. How can I say that and
then go on chattering like this? If I push myself to write something, the only thing to write is that writing is
useless. It is very perplexing.

I do not care to dwell on my own past long enough to write about it, and I am not wise enough to predict the
future. Stirring the fire while making hearthside conversation on daily affairs, how can I ask anybody to put up

with an old farmer’s foolish notions?

On the ridgetop of the orchard, overlooking Masuyama Bay and the broad Dogo Plain, are several small,

mudwalled huts. There, a handful of people have gathered and are living a simple life together.

There are no modern conveniences. Spending peaceful evenings beneath candle and lamplight, they live a
life of simple necessities: brown rice, vegetables, a robe and a bowl. They come from somewhere, stay for a
while, and then move on.

Among the guests are agricultural researchers, students, scholars, farmers, hippies, poets and wanderers,
young and old, men and women of various types and nationalities. Most of those who stay for a long time are
young people in need of a period of introspection.

My function is to act as caretaker of this wayside inn, serving tea to the travellers who come and go.

And while they are helping out in the fields, I enjoy listening to how things are going in the world.

This sounds fine, but actually it is not such a soft and easy life. I advocate “do-nothing” farming, and so
many people come, thinking they will find a Utopia where one can live without ever having to get out of bed.

These people are in for a big surprise. Hauling water from the spring in the early morning fog, splitting

The orchard and huts from the mountain above.

firewood until their hands are red and stinging with blisters, working ankle-deep in mud—there are many who
quickly call it quits.

Today, as I watched a group of young people work on a tiny hut, a young woman from Funabashi came
walking up.

When I asked why she had come, she said, “I just came, that’s all. I don’t know anything anymore.”

Bright young lady, nonchalant, has her wits about her.

I then asked, “If you know you are unenlightened, there is nothing to say, right? In coming to understand the
world through the power of discrimination, people lose sight of its meaning. Isn’t that why the world is in such a
fix?”

She answered softly, “Yes, if you say so.”

“Maybe you don’t have a really clear idea of what enlightenment is. What kind of books did you read before
coming here?”

She shook her head in rejection of reading.

People study because they think they do not understand, but studying is not going to help one to understand.
They study hard only to find out in the end that people cannot know anything, that understanding lies beyond
human reach.

Usually people think that the word “non-understanding” applies when you say, for example, that you
understand nine things, but there is one thing you do not understand. But intending to understand ten things, you
actually do not understand even one. If you know a hundred flowers you do not “know” a single one. People
struggle hard to understand, convince themselves that they understand, and die knowing nothing.

The young people took a break from their carpentry, sat down on the grass near a big mandarin orange tree,

and looked up at the wispy clouds in the southern sky.

People think that when they turn their eyes from the earth to the sky they see the heavens. They set the
orange fruit apart from the green leaves and say they know the green of the leaves and the orange of the fruit.
But from the instant one makes a distinction between green and orange, the true colors vanish.

People think they understand things because they become familiar with them. This is only superficial
knowledge. It is the knowledge of the astronomer who knows the names of the stars, the botanist who knows the
classification of the leaves and flowers, the artist who knows the aesthetics of green and red. This is not to know
nature itself- the earth and sky, green and red. Astronomer, botanist, and artist have done no more than grasp
impressions and interpret them, each within the vault of his own mind. The more involved they become with the
activity of the intellect, the more they set themselves apart and the more difficult it becomes to live naturally.

The tragedy is that in their unfounded arrogance, people attempt to bend nature to their will. Human beings
can destroy natural forms, but they cannot create them. Discrimination, a fragmented and incomplete
understanding, always forms the starting point of human knowledge. Unable to know the whole of nature,
people can do no better than to construct an incomplete model of it and then delude themselves into thinking
that they have created something natural.

All someone has to do to know nature is to realize that he does not really know anything, that he is unable to
know anything. It can then be expected that he will lose interest in discriminating knowledge.

When he abandons discriminating knowledge, non-discriminating knowledge of itself arises within him. If

he does not try to think about knowing, if he does not care about understanding, the time will come

when he will understand. There is no other way than through the destruction of the ego, casting aside the
thought that humans exist apart from heaven and earth.

“This means being foolish instead of being smart,” I snapped at a young fellow who had a wise look of
complacency on his face. “What kind of look is that in your eyes? Foolishness comes out looking smart. Do you
know for sure whether you’re smart or foolish, or are you trying to become a foolish-type smart guy? You can’t
become smart, can’t become foolish, stuck at a standstill. Isn’t that where you are now?”

Before I knew it I was angry with myself for repeating the same words over and over again, words which
could never match the wisdom of remaining silent, words I myself could not understand.

The autumn sun was sinking low on the horizon. Twilight colors approached the foot of the old tree. With
the light from the Inland Sea at their backs, the silent youths returned slowly to the huts for their evening meal. I

followed quietly behind in the shadows.

Who Is the Fool?

It is said that there is no creature as wise as the human being. By applying, this wisdom, people have
become the only animals capable of nuclear war.

The other day the head of the natural foods store in front of Osaka Station climbed up the mountain,
bringing along seven companions, like the seven gods of good fortune. At noon, while we were feasting on an
impromptu brown rice hodgepodge, one of them told the following: ““Among children there is always one
without a care in the world who laughs happily as he pees, there is another who always ends up the ‘horse’ when
playing ‘horse and rider,’ and always a third who is clever at tricking the others out of their afternoon snack.
Before the head of the class is chosen, the teacher talks seriously about the desirable qualities of a good leader
and the importance of making a wise decision. When the election is held, it is the youngster who laughs happily
by the side of the road who is chosen.”

Everyone was amused, but I could not understand why they were laughing. I thought it was only natural.

If things are seen in terms of gain and loss, one must regard as the loser the child who always ends up

playing the role of the horse, but greatness and mediocrity do not apply to children. The teacher thought

the clever child was the most remarkable, but the other children saw him as being clever in the wrong way,
someone who would oppress others.

To think that the one who is smart and can look out for himself is exceptional, and that it is better to be
exceptional, is to follow “adult” values. The one who goes about his own business, eats and sleeps well, the one
with nothing to worry about, would seem to me to be living in the most satisfactory manner. There is no one so
great as the one who does not try to accomplish anything.

In Aesop’s fable, when the frogs asked god for a king, he presented them with a log. The frogs made fun of
the dumb log and when they asked the god for a greater king, he sent down a crane. As the story goes, the crane
pecked all the frogs to death.

If the one who stands out in front is great, the ones who follow behind have to struggle and strain. If you set
a regular fellow up in front, those who come after have an easy time. People think that someone who is strong
and clever is outstanding, and so they select a prime minister who pulls the country like a diesel locomotive.

“What kind of person should be chosen for prime minister?”

“A dumb log,” I replied. “There’s nobody better than daruma-san,[ ‘Daruma-san is a popular Japanese
children’s toy. It is a bi balloon, weighted at the bottom, in the shape of a monk seated in meditation.]” I replied. “He is
such a relaxed fellow he can sit for years in meditation without saying a word. If you give him a shove he rolls
over, but with the persistence of non-resistance he always sits back up. Daruma-san doesn’t just sit idly by,
keeping his hands and feet folded. Knowing that you should keep them folded, he scowls silently at the people

who want to stick theirs out.”

“Tf you did nothing at all the world could keep running. What would the world be without development?”
“Why do you have to develop? If economic growth rises from 5% to 10%, is happiness going double? What’s
wrong with a growth rate of 0% ? Isn’t this a rather stable kind of economics? Could there be anything better
than living simply and taking it easy?”

People find something out, learn how it work and put nature to use, thinking this will be for the good of
humankind. The result of all this, up to no’ is that the planet has become polluted, people have become
confused, and we have invited in the chaos modern times.

At this farm we practice “do-nothing” farming and eat wholesome and delicious grains, vegetable and citrus.

There is meaning and basic satisfaction

“We have come to the point at which there is no other way than to bring a ‘movement’ not to bring anything

about.”

just in living close to the source of things. Life is song and poetry.

The farmer became too busy when people began to investigate the world and decided that it would be
“good” if we did this or did that. All my research has been in the direction of not doing this or that. These thirty
years have taught me that farmers would have been better off doing almost nothing at all.

The more people do, the more society develops, the more problems arise. The increasing desolation of
nature, the exhaustion of resources, the uneasiness and disintegration of the human spirit, all have been brought
about by humanity’s trying to accomplish something. Originally there was no reason to progress, and nothing

that had to be done. We have come to the point at which there is no other way than to bring about a “movement”

not to bring anything about.

I Was Born to Go to Nursery School

A young man with a small bag over his shoulder walked leisurely up to where we were working in the
fields.

“Where are you from?” I asked.

“Over there.”

“How did you get here?”

“T walked.”

“What did you come here for?”

“T don’t know.”

Most of those who come here are in no hurry to reveal their names or the story of their past. They do not
make their purpose very clear either. Since many of them do not know why they come, but just come, this is
only natural.

From the first, man does not know where he comes from or where he is going. To say that you are born from
your mother’s womb and return to the earth is a biological explanation, but no one really knows what exists
before birth or what kind of world is waiting after death.

Born without knowing the reason only to close one’s eyes and depart for the infinite unknown the human
being is indeed a tragic creature.

The other day, I had found a woven sedge hat left by a group of pilgrims who were visiting the temples of

Shikoku. On it were written the words, “Originally

no east or west/ Ten infinite directions.” Now, holding the hat in my hands, I asked the youth again where he
had come from, and he said that he was the son of a temple priest in Kanazawa, and since it was just foolishness
to read scriptures to the dead all day, he wanted to become a farmer.

There is no east or west. The sun comes up in the east, sets in the west, but this is merely an astronomical
observation. Knowing that you do not understand either east or west is closer to the truth. The fact is, no one
knows where the sun comes from.

Among the tens of thousands of scriptures, the one to be most grateful for, the one where all the important
points are made, is the Heart Sutra. According to this sutra, “The Lord Buddha declared, ‘Form is emptiness,
emptiness is form. Matter and the spirit are one, but all is void. Man is not alive, is not dead, is unborn and
undying, without old age and disease, without increase and without decrease.”

The other day while we were cutting the rice, I said to the youths who were resting against a big pile of
straw, “I was thinking that when rice is planted in the spring, the seed sends out living shoots, and now, as we
are reaping, it appears to die. The fact that this ritual is repeated year after year means that life continues in this
field and the yearly death is itself yearly birth. You could say that the rice we are cutting now lives
continuously.”

Human beings usually see life and death in a rather short perspective. What meaning can the birth of spring
and the death of autumn have for this grass? People think that life is joy and death is sadness, but the rice seed,
lying within the earth and sending out shoots in spring, its leaves and stems withering in the fall, still holds
within its tiny core the full joy of life: The joy of life does not depart in death. Death is no more than a

momentary passing. Wouldn’t you say

that this rice, because it possesses the full joyousness of life, does not know the sorrow of death?

The same thing that happens to rice and barley goes on continuously within the human body. Day by day
hair and nails grow, tens of thousands of cells die, tens of thousands more are born; the blood in the body a
month ago is not the same blood today. When you think that your own characteristics will be propagated in the
bodies of your children and grandchildren, you could say that you are dying and being reborn each day, and yet
will live on for many generations after death.

If participation in this cycle can be experienced and savored each day, nothing more is necessary. But most
people are not able to enjoy life as it passes and changes from day to day. They cling to life as they have already
experienced it, and this habitual attachment brings fear of death. Paying attention only to the past, which has
already gone, or to the future, which has yet to come, they forget that they are living on the earth here and now.
Struggling in confusion, they watch their lives pass as in a dream.

“Tf life and death are realities, isn’t human suffering inescapable?”

“There is no life or death.”

“How can you say that?”

The world itself is a unity of matter within the flow of experience, but people’s minds divide phenomena
into dualities such as life and death, yin and yang, being and emptiness. The mind comes to believe in the
absolute validity of what the senses perceive and then, for the first time, matter as it is turns into objects as
human beings normally perceive them.

The forms of the material world, concepts of life and death, health and disease, joy and sorrow, all originate

in the human mind. In the sutra, when Buddha said that all is void, he was not only denying intrinsic

reality to anything which is constructed by human intellect, but he was also declaring that haman emotions are
illusions.

“You mean ail is illusion? There’s nothing left?”

“Nothing left? The concept of ‘void’ still remains in your mind apparently,” I said to the youth. “If you
don’t know where you came from or where you’re going, then how can you be sure you’re here, standing in

front of me? Is existence meaningless?”

The other morning I heard a four-year-old girl ask her mother, “Why was I born into this world? To go to
nursery school?”

Naturally her mother could not honestly say, “Yes, that’s right, so off you go.” And yet, you could say that
people these days are born to go to nursery school.

Right up through college people study diligently to learn why they were born. Scholars and philosophers,
even if they ruin their lives in the attempt, say they will be satisfied to understand this one thing.

Originally human beings had no purpose. Now, dreaming up some purpose or other, they struggle away
trying to find the meaning of life. It is a one man wrestling match. There is no purpose one has to think about, or
go out in search of. You would do well to ask the children whether or not a life without purpose is meaningless.

From the time they enter nursery school, people’s sorrows begin. The human being was a happy creature,
but he created a hard world and now struggles trying to break out of it. In nature there is life and death, and
nature is joyful.

In human society there is life and death, and people live in sorrow.

Drifting Clouds
and the Illusion of Science

This morning I am washing citrus storage boxes by the river. As I stoop on a flat rock, my hands feel the
chill of the autumn river. The red leaves of the sumacs along the river bank stand out against the clear blue
autumn sky. I am struck with wonder by the unexpected splendor of the branches against the sky.

Within this casual scene the entire world of experience is present. In the flowing water, the flow of time, the
left bank and right bank, the sunshine and shadows, the red leaves and blue sky - all appear within the sacred,
silent book of nature. And man is a slender, thinking reed.

Once he inquires what nature is, he then must inquire what that “what” is, and what that human who
inquires what that “what” is is. He heads, that is to say, into a world of endless questioning.

In trying to gain a clear understanding of what it is that fills him with wonder, what it is that astonishes him,
he has two possible paths. The first is to look deeply into himself, at him who asks the question, “What is
nature?”

The second is to examine nature apart from man.

The first path leads to the realm of philosophy and religion. Gazing vacantly, it is not unnatural to see the

water as flowing from above to below, but

there is no inconsistency in seeing the water as standing still and the bridge as flowing by.

If, on the other hand, following the second path, the scene is divided into a variety of natural phenomena,
the water, the speed of the current, the waves, the wind and white clouds, all of these separately become objects
of investigation, leading to further questions, which spread out endlessly in all directions. This is the path of
science.

The world used to be simple. You merely noticed in passing that you got wet by brushing against the drops
of dew while meandering through the meadow. But from the time people undertook to explain this one drop of
dew scientifically, they trapped themselves in the endless hell of the intellect.

Water molecules are made up of atoms of hydrogen and oxygen. People once thought that the smallest
particles in the world were atoms, but then they found out that there was a nucleus inside the atom.

Now they have discovered that within the nucleus there are even tinier particles. Among these nuclear
particles there are hundreds of different varieties and no one knows where the examination of this minute world
will end.

It is said that the way electrons orbit at ultra-high speeds within the atom is exactly like the flight of comets
within the galaxy. To the atomic physicist the world of elementary particles is a world as vast as the universe
itself. Yet it has been shown that in addition to the immediate galaxy in which we live there are countless other
galaxies. In the eyes of the cosmologist, then, our entire galaxy becomes infinitesimally small.

The fact is that people who think a drop of water is simple or that a rock is fixed and inert are happy,

ignorant fools, and the scientists who know that the drop of water is a great universe and the rock is an

active world of elementary particles streaming about like rockets, are clever fools. Looked at simply, this world
is real and at hand. Seen as complex, the world becomes frighteningly abstract and distant.

The scientists who rejoiced when rocks were brought back from the moon have less grasp of the moon than
the children who sing out, “How old are you, Mr. Moon?” Basho [A famous Japanese haiku poet (1644-1694)]
could apprehend the wonder of nature by watching the reflection of the full moon in the tranquillity of a pond.
All the scientists did when they went off into space and stomped around in their spaceboots was to tarnish a bit
of the moon’s splendor for millions of lovers and children on the earth.

How is it that people think science is beneficial to humanity?

Originally grain was ground into flour in this village by a stone mill which was turned slowly by hand.

Then a watermill, which had incomparably greater momentum than the old stone grinder, was built to utilize
the power of the river current. Several years ago a dam was constructed to produce hydroelectric power and an
electrically powered mill was built.

How do you think this advanced machinery works for the benefit of human beings? In order to grind rice
into flour, it is first polished that is, made into white rice. This means husking the grain, removing the germ and
the bran, which are the basis of good health, and keeping the leftovers [in Japanese the character for leftovers
pronounced kasu- is composed of radicals meaning “white” and “rice)”the character for bran nuka-is made up of
“rice” and “health”]. And so the result of this technology is the breaking down of the whole grain into

incomplete by-products. If the too easily digestible white rice becomes the daily staple,

the diet lacks nutrients, and dietary supplements become necessary. The water wheel and the milling factory are
doing the work of the stomach and intestines, and their consequence is to make these organs lazy.

It is the same with fuel. Crude oil is formed when the tissue of ancient plants buried deep in the earth is
transformed by great pressure and heat. This substance is dug out of the desert, sent to a port by pipe-line, and
then transported by boat to Japan and refined into kerosene and oil at a big refinery.

Which do you think is quicker, warmer, and more convenient, burning this kerosene or branches of cedar or
pine from in front of the house? (at the present time much of the world is faced with a shortage of firewood.
Implicit in Mr. Fukuoka’s argument is the need to plant trees. More broadly, Mr. Fukuoka is suggesting modest,
direct answers to the needs of daily life) The fuel is the same plant matter. The oil and kerosene just followed a
longer path in getting here.

Now they are saying that the fossil fuels are not enough, and that we need to develop atomic energy. To
search out the scarce uranium ore, compress it into radioactive fuel and burn it in a huge nuclear furnace is not
as easy as burning dried leaves with a match. Moreover, the hearth fire leaves only ashes, but after a nuclear fire
has burned, the radioactive waste remains dangerous for many thousands of years. The same principle holds in
agriculture. Grow a soft, fat rice plant in a flooded field and you get a plant easily attacked by insects and
disease. If “improved” seed varieties are used one must rely on the help of chemical insecticides and fertilizer.

On the other hand, if you grow a small, sturdy plant in a healthy environment, these chemicals are
unnecessary.

Cultivate a flooded rice field with a plow or tractor and the soil becomes deficient in oxygen, the soil

structure is broken down, earthworms and other small animals are destroyed, and the earth becomes hard and
lifeless. Once this happens, the field must be turned every year.

But if a method is adopted in which the earth cultivates itself naturally, there is no need for a plow or
cultivating machine. After the living soil is burned clean of organic matter and microorganisms, the use of fast-
acting fertilizers becomes necessary. If chemical fertilizer is used the rice grows fast and tall, but so do the
weeds. Herbicides are then applied and thought to be beneficial.

But if clover is sown with the grain, and all the straw and organic residues are returned to the surface of the
field as mulch, crops can be grown without herbicides, chemical fertilizer or prepared compost.

In farming there is little that cannot be eliminated. Prepared fertilizer, herbicide, insecticide, machinery all
are unnecessary. But if a condition is created in which they become necessary, then the power of science is
required.

I have demonstrated in my fields that natural farming produces harvests comparable to those of modern
scientific agriculture. If the results of a non-active agriculture are comparable to those of science, at a fraction of

the investment in labor and resources, then where is the benefit of scientific technology?

The Theory of Relativity

Looking out into the bright sunlight of the autumn sky, scanning the surrounding fields, I was amazed. In
every field but mine there was a rice harvesting machine or combine running around. In the last three years, this
village has changed beyond recognition.

As one might expect, the youths on the mountain do not envy the changeover to mechanization. They enjoy

the quiet, peaceful harvest with the old hand sickle.

Sharpening a long-handled scythe.

That night as we were finishing the evening meal, I recalled over tea how, long ago in this village, in the
days when the farmers were turning the fields by hand, one man began to use a cow. He was very proud of the
ease and speed with which he could finish the laborious job of plowing. Twenty years ago when the first
mechanical cultivator made its appearance, the villagers all got together and debated seriously which was better,
the cow or the machine. In two or three years it became clear that plowing by machine was faster, and without
looking beyond considerations of time and convenience, the farmers abandoned their draft animals. The
inducement was simply to finish the job more quickly than the farmer in the next field.

The farmer does not realize that he has merely become a factor in modern agriculture’s equation of
increasing speed and efficiency. He lets the farm equipment salesman do all the figuring for him.

Originally people would look into a starry night sky and feel awe at the vastness of the universe. Now
questions of time and space are left entirely to the consideration of scientists.

It is said that Einstein was given the Nobel Prize in physics in deference to the incomprehensibility of his
theory of relativity. If his theory had explained clearly the phenomenon of relativity in the world and thus
released humanity from the confines of time and space, bringing about a more pleasant and peaceful world, it
would have been commendable. His explanation is bewildering, however, and it caused people to think that the
world is complex beyond all possible understanding. A citation for “disturbing the peace of the human spirit”
should have been awarded instead.

In nature, the world of relativity does not exist. The idea of relative phenomena is a structure given to

experience by the human intellect. Other animals live in a world of undivided reality. To the extent that one
lives in the relative world of the intellect, one loses sight of time that is beyond time and of space that is beyond
space.

“You might be wondering why I have this habit of picking on the scientists all the time,” I said, pausing to
take a sip of tea. The youths looked up smiling, faces glowing and flickering in the firelight. “It’s because the

role of the scientist in society is analogous to the role of discrimination in your own minds.”

A Village Without War and Peace

A snake seizes a frog in its mouth and slips away into the grass. A girl screams. A brave lad bares his
feelings of loathing and flings a rock at the snake. The others laugh. I turn to the boy who threw the stone:
“What do you think that’s going to accomplish?”

The hawk hunts the snake. The wolf attacks the hawk. A human kills the wolf, and later succumbs to a
tuberculosis virus. Bacteria breed in the remains of the human, and other animals, grasses, and trees thrive on
the nutrients made available by the bacteria’s activity. Insects attack the trees, the frog eats the insects. Animals,
plants, microorganisms all are part of the cycle of life. Maintaining a suitable balance, they live a naturally
regulated existence. People may choose to view this world either as a model of strong consuming weak, or of
co-existence and mutual benefit. Either way, it is an arbitrary interpretation which causes wind and waves,
brings about disorder and confusion.

Adults think the frog is deserving of pity, and feeling compassion for its death, despise the snake.

This feeling may seem to be natural, just a matter of course, but is this what it really is?

One youth said, “If life is seen as a contest in which the strong consume the weak, the face of the

earth becomes a hell of carnage and destruction. But it is unavoidable that the weak should be sacrificed so that
the strong may live. That the strong win and survive and the weak die out is a rule of nature. After the passage
of millions of years, the creatures now living on the earth have been victorious in the struggle for life. You could
say that the survival of the fittest is a providence of nature.”

Said a second youth, “That’s how it appears to the winners, anyway. The way I see it, this world is one of
co-existence and mutual benefit. At the foot of the grain in this field, clover, and so many varieties of grasses
and weeds are living mutually beneficial lives. Ivy winds around the trees; moss and lichen live attached to the
tree’s trunk and branches. Ferns spread beneath the forest canopy. Birds and frogs, plants, insects, small
animals, bacteria, fungi -all creatures perform essential roles and benefit from one another’s existence.”

A third spoke, “The earth is a world of the strong consuming the weak, and also one of co-existence. The
stronger creatures take no more food than necessary; though they attack other creatures, the overall balance of
nature is maintained. The providence of nature is an ironclad rule, preserving peace and order upon the earth.”

Three people and three points of view. I met all three opinions with a flat denial.

The world itself never asks whether it is based upon a principle of competition or of cooperation. When seen
from the relative perspective of the human intellect, there are those who are strong and there are those who are
weak, there is large and there is small.

Now there is no one who doubts that this relative outlook exists, but if we were to suppose that the

relativity of human perception is mistaken-for

“Tn nature, the world of relativity does not exist.”

example, that there is no big and no small, no up or down -if we say there is no such standpoint at all, human
values and judgment would collapse.

“TIsn’t that way of seeing the world an empty flight of the imagination? In reality, there are large countries
and small countries. If there is poverty and plenty, strong and weak, inevitably there will be disputes, and
consequently, winners and losers. Couldn’t you say, rather, that these relative perceptions and the resulting
emotions are human and therefore natural, that they are a unique privilege of being human?”

Other animals fight but do not make war. If you say that making war, which depends upon ideas of strong
and weak, is humanity’s special “privilege,” then life is a farce. Not knowing this farce to be a farce there lies
the human tragedy. The ones who live peacefully in a world of no contradictions and no distinctions are infants.
They perceive light and dark, strong and weak, but make no judgments. Even though the snake and the frog
exist, the child has no understanding of strong and weak. The original joy of life is there, but the fear of death is
yet to appear.

The love and hate which arise in the adult’s eyes originally were not two separate things. They are the same
thing as seen from the front and from the back. Love gives substance to hate. If you turn the coin of love over, it
becomes hate. Only by penetrating to an absolute world of no aspects, is it possible to avoid becoming lost in
the duality of the phenomenal world.

People distinguish between Self and Other. To the extent that the ego exists, to the extent that there is an

“other,” people will not be relieved from love and hatred. The heart that loves the wicked ego creates

the hated enemy. For humans, the first and greatest enemy is the Self that they hold so dear.

People choose to attack or to defend. In the ensuing struggle they accuse one another of instigating conflict.
It is like clapping your hands and then arguing about which is making the sound, the right hand or the left. In all
contentions there is neither right nor wrong, neither good nor bad. All conscious distinctions arise at the same
time and all are mistaken.

To build a fortress is wrong from the start. Even though he gives the excuse that it is for the city’s defense,
the castle is the outcome of the ruling lord’s personality, and exerts a coercive force on the surrounding area.
Saying he is afraid of attack and that fortification is for the town’s protection, the bully stocks up weapons and
puts the key in the door.

The act of defense is already an attack. Weapons for self-defense always give a pretext to those who
instigate wars. The calamity of war comes from the strengthening and magnifying of empty distinctions of
self/other, strong/weak, attack/defense. There is no other road to peace than for all people to depart from the
castle gate of relative perception, go down into the meadow, and return to the heart of non-active nature. That is,
sharpening the sickle instead of the sword.

The farmers of long ago were a peaceful people, but now they are arguing with Australia about meat,
quarreling with Russia over fish, and dependent on America for wheat and soybeans.

I feel as if we in Japan are living in the shadow of a big tree, and there is no place more dangerous to be
during a thunderstorm than under a big tree. And there could be nothing more foolish than taking shelter under a

“nuclear umbrella” which will be the first target in the next war. Now we are tilling the earth

beneath that dark umbrella. I feel as though a crisis is approaching from both inside and out.

Get rid of the aspects of inside and outside. Farmers everywhere in the world are at root the same farmers.

Let us say that the key to peace lies close to the earth.

The One-Straw Revolution

Among the young people who come to these mountain huts, there are those, poor in body and spirit, who
have given up all hope. I am only an old farmer who grieves that he cannot even provide them with a pair of
sandals - but there is still one-thing I can give them.

One straw.

I picked up some straw from in front of the hut and said, “From just this one straw a revolution could
begin.”

“With the destruction of mankind at hand, you can still hope to cling to a straw?” one youth asked, with a
touch of bitterness in his voice.

This straw appears small and light, and most people do not know how really weighty it is. If people knew
the true value of this straw a human revolution could occur which would become powerful enough to move the
country and the world.

When I was a child there was a man who lived near Inuyose Pass. All he seemed to do was to pack charcoal
on horseback two miles or so along the road from the top of the mountain to the port of Gunchu. And yet he
became rich. If you ask how, people will tell you that on his trip homeward from the port he gathered the

discarded straw horseshoes and the manure by the side of the road and put them onto his

field. His motto was: “Treat one strand of straw as important and never take a useless step.” It made him a
wealthy man.

“Even if you burned the straw, I don’t think it could kindle a spark to start a revolution.”

A gentle breeze rustled through the orchard trees, sunlight flickering among the green leaves. I began to talk
about using straw in growing rice. It has been nearly forty years since I realized how important straw could be in
growing rice and barley.

At that time, passing an old rice field in Kochi Prefecture which had been left unused and uncultivated for
many years, I saw healthy young rice sprouting up through a tangle of weeds and straw which had accumulated
on the field’s surface. After working on the implications of that for many years, I came out advocating a
completely new method of rice and barley growing.

Believing that this was a natural and revolutionary way of farming, I wrote about it in books and magazines,
and spoke of it on television and radio dozens of times.

It seems a very simple thing, but farmers are so set in their thinking about how straw should be used, that it
is unlikely that they will accept change easily. Spreading fresh straw on a field can be risky because rice blast
and stem rot are diseases always present in rice straw. In the past, these diseases have caused great damage, and
this is one of the main reasons that farmers have always turned the straw into compost before putting it back
onto the field. Long ago, careful disposal of rice straw was commonly practiced as a countermeasure against
blast disease, and there were times in Hokkaido when the wholesale burning of straw was required by law.

Stem borers also enter the straw to pass the winter. To prevent an infestation of these insects,

farmers used to compost the straw carefully all winter long to be sure that it would be completely decomposed
by the following spring. That is why Japanese farmers have always kept their fields so neat and tidy. The
practical knowledge of everyday life was that if farmers left straw lying around, they would be punished by
heaven for their negligence.

After years of experimentation, even technical experts have now, confirmed my theory that spreading fresh
straw on the field six months before seeding is completely safe. This overturned all previous ideas on the
subject. But it is going to be a long while before the farmers become receptive to using straw in this manner.

Farmers have been working for centuries to try to increase the production of compost. The Ministry of

Agriculture used to give incentive pay to encourage compost production, and competitive compost
exhibitions were held as annual events. Farmers came to believe in compost as though it were the protective
deity of the soil. Now again there is a movement to make more compost, “better” compost, with earthworms and
“compost-starter.” There is no reason to expect an easy acceptance of my suggestion that prepared compost is
unnecessary, that all you have to do is scatter fresh unshredded straw across the field.

In traveling up to Tokyo, looking out the window of the Tokaido train, I have seen the transformation of the
Japanese countryside. Looking at the winter fields, the appearance of which has completely changed in ten
years, I feel an anger I cannot express. The former landscape of neat fields of green barley, Chinese milk vetch,
and blooming rape plants is nowhere to be seen. Instead, half-burned straw is piled roughly in heaps and left
soaking in the rain. That this straw is being neglected is proof of the’ disorder of modern farming. The

barrenness of these

fields reveals the barrenness of the farmer’s spirit. It challenges the responsibility of government leaders, and
clearly points out the absence of a wise agricultural policy.

The man who several years ago talked about a “merciful end” to the growing of winter grain, of its “death
by the side of the road” what does he think now when he sees these empty fields? Seeing the barren fields of
wintertime Japan, I can remain patient no longer. With this straw, I, by myself, will begin a revolution !

The youths who had been listening silently were now roaring with laughter.

“A one-man revolution! Tomorrow let’s get a big sack of barley, rice, and clover seed and take off, carrying
it on our shoulders, like Okuninushi-no-mikoto,(‘The legendary Japanese god of healing who travels around
tossing good fortune from a large sack which he carries over his shoulder.) and broadcast seeds all over the
fields of Tokaido.”

“That’s not a one-man revolution,” I laughed, “it’s a one-straw revolution”

Stepping out of the hut into the afternoon sunlight, I paused for a moment and gazed at the surrounding
orchard trees laden with ripening fruit, and at the chickens scratching in the weeds and clover. I then began my

familiar descent to the fields.


Related Organic Farming Titles

The Natural Way Farming
Masanobu Fukuoka pp.288(1998) Rs. 300
The Road Back to Nature
Masanobu Fukuoka pp.378(1998) Rs. 300
The Organic Farming Source Book
Edited by Claude Alvares pp.368 LF(1999) Rs. 300
The Organic Farming Reader
Edited by Claude Alvares et al. pp.298(1999) Rs. 150
The Miracle Called Compost
Vasantrao Bombatkar pp.38(1996) Rs. 25
The Violence of Green Revolution
Vandana Shiva pp.264(2001) Rs. 195
Community City Farming
R.T. Doshi pp.44(1998) Rs. 100
City Farming
R. T. Doshi pp.27 (1998) Rs. 50
Festivals of Biodiversity
Kusum Mishra Panigrahi pp.96 (1999) Rs. 80
The World of Genetic Engineering
Aparna Bhar pp.76 (1999) Rs. 60
Rice: Non-Chemical Pest Control
K. Vijayalakshmi et al. pp.59 (1998) Rs. 35
Asking the Earth
Winin Pereira & Jeremy Seabrook pp.295 (1996) Rs. 110
Vermicology — The Biology of Earthworms
Sultan A. Ismail pp.92 (1997) Rs.75
Earthworm: Vermi Culture and Vermi Composting
R.K. Bhatnagar & R.K. Palta pp.116 (1996) Rs. 50
Monocultures of the Mind
Vandana Shiva pp. 185 (1993) Rs. 222
Return to the Good Earth
Third World Network pp. 600 LF (1995) Rs. 600
Neem - A User’s Manual
Centre for Indian Knowledge Systems pp. 96 (1995) Rs. 75

All title available from Other India Bookstore
(See Overleaf)


